@import url(./../../../../css/generic.css);

EUR-Lex - 51999PC0036 - EN

Avis juridique important

|

51999PC0036

Proposal for a Council Regulation on measures to promote the full integration of the environmental dimension in EC external policies and in the development process of developing countries.  /* COM/99/0036 final - SYN 99/0020 */

Official Journal C 047 , 20/02/1999 P. 0010

Proposal for a Council Regulation (EC) on measures to promote the full integration of the environmental dimension in the development process of developing countries (1999/C 47/06) COM(1999) 36 final - 1999/0020(SYN)

(Submitted by the Commission on 28 January 1999)

THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION,

Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Community, and in particular Articles 130s and 130w thereof,

Having regard to the proposal from the Commission,

Having regard to the opinion of the Economic and Social Committee,

Acting in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 189c of the Treaty,

(1) Whereas depletion of natural resources and environmental degradation have direct effects on economic development and especially on the livelihoods of local and indigenous communities and thus counteract the alleviation of poverty through sustainable development;

Whereas current patterns of production and consumption have undeniable transboundary and global consequences, in particular where the atmosphere, the hydrosphere, soilcondition, and biological diversity are concerned

(3) Whereas the Community and its Member States are signatories to the Rio Declaration and the Agenda 21 action programme, and are committed to the UNGASS Resolution, 'Programme for the further implementation of Agenda 21`;

(4) Whereas the Community and its Member States are parties to Multi-lateral Environment Agreements, notably the Convention on Biological Diversity, the Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Convention to Combat Desertification; whereas they are thus committed to take into account the common but differentiated responsibilities of developed parties and developing parties on these subjects;

(5) Whereas it is important to integrate the internal and external aspects of the European Community's environment policy in order to have a coherent answer to the challenges identified in the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) and its follow-up processes;

(6) Whereas the Community and its Member States are committed to the OECD/DAC 'Shaping the 21st Century Strategy`, which calls for the support for the implementation of national strategies for sustainable development in all countries by 2005, so as to ensure that current trends in the loss of environmental resources are effectively reversed at both global and national levels by 2015;

(7) Whereas the European Parliament and the Council, by decision of 24 September 1998, adopted a revised version of the European Community programme of policy and action in relation to the environment and sustainable development "Towards Sustainability", calling for a strengthened role for the Community in international cooperation in environment and sustainable development;

Whereas the basic strategy of the Programme is to achieve full integration of environmental policy in other policies, including development policy ;

whereas the Decision on the revised programme is binding on the institutions in respect of the objectives and priorities that the Programme lays down; whereas the Decision recognises the need for further and still more progressive objectives and measures beyond the year 2000 to maintain the momentum of Community action ;

whereas the Decision calls on the Commission to come forward with appropriate proposals to give effect to Programme's objectives and recalls that the need to integrate environmental considerations into Community policy and action should be translated into more operational terms;

whereas the present Regulation affords an opportunity to implement the objectives laid down by the Programme within the sphere of development policy and other external policies;

(8) Whereas the European Council, held in Cardiff in June 1998, welcomed the Commission Communication 'Partnership for Integration`, setting out a strategy for integrating environment into European Union policies, and endorsed the principle that major policy proposals should be accompanied by the appraisal of their environmental impact;

	
Whereas the Community should adopt a twintrack approach, on the one hand, of integrating environmental policy with its development policy and other external policies, and, on the other, of encouraging the partner countries with which it cooperates to adopt the same objective of policy integration in favour of sustainable development; whereas the Community must, through its internal and external policies, set a good example in this respect for the countries with which it is linked through development cooperation;

(9) Whereas the Council and the Member States adopted on 15 July 1996 a resolution on Environmental Assessment in Development Cooperation;


	
Whereas the Council resolution on indigenous peoples within the framework of the development cooperation of the Community and the Member States as well as the Commission paper on support for indigenous peoples in the development cooperation of the Community and the Member States stress the importance of the role of indigenous peoples for sustainable environmentally sound development based on indigenous development priorities and the promotion of “self-development” of indigenous communities;

(10) Whereas sustainable development relies on the genuine integration of an environmental dimension into the development process;

(11) Whereas, since resources are limited, the creation of suitable policies, strategies and tools, and the implementation of experimental schemes are essential elements for such integration in economic and development cooperation;

12. Whereas the special financial instruments available to the Community for conservation and sustainable development should be supplemented by an instrument intended to favour environmental protection exclusively in the developing countries,
(13) Whereas Council Regulation (EC) No 722/97 of 22 April 1997 on environmental measures in developing countries in the context of sustainable development (2) set out the framework for Community assistance aimed at enabling developing countries to integrate the environmental dimension in their development process; whereas Regulation (EC) No 722/97 was applicable until 31 December 1999; whereas the experience acquired during the implementation of Regulation (EC) No 722/97 should be reflected in this regulation;

Whereas measures need to be taken to finance the activities covered by this Regulation ; whereas the success of the activities carried out under Regulation (EC) n˚ 722/97 should be taken into account ; whereas the financial amount indicated in that Regulation should be considered as an absolute minimum for the annual implementation of the present Regulation ;

	
Whereas in accordance with Article 205 of the Treaty, the Commission shall be responsible for implementing the budget;



(15)Whereas detailed rules for implementation, and in particular the form of action, the recipients of the aid and the decision-making procedure should be laid down ; whereas an advisory committee procedure is the most appropriate arrangement ;

whereas Council Decision 87/373/EEC (1) lays down the procedures for the exercise of powers conferred on the Commission by the Council for the implementation of acts which it adopts; whereas the procedures laid down in the present Regulation shall need to be revised to take account of the entry into force of the Amsterdam Treaty and of possible modifications of existing arrangements laid down by inter- institutional agreement or by Decision 87/373/EEC;

Whereas a Modus Vivendi between the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission concerning the implementing measures for certain acts was concluded on 20 December 1994;

HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:

Article 1

1. The Community shall provide financial assistance and technical expertise in order to support developing countries in their efforts to integrate the environmental dimension into their development process.

2. The assistance and expertise provided under this Regulation shall complement and reinforce those provided under other instruments of development cooperation.

They shall benefit the developing country stakeholders directly and indirectly through the strengthening of the environmental dimension of the Community economic and development cooperation, with a view to fully taking into account environmental considerations in Community policies and programmes.

Article 2

1. The activities to be carried out under this Regulation shall serve the purpose of elaborating, promoting and implementing policies, strategies, programmes and projects, together with tools and technologies for the pursuit of sustainable development.

In accordance with the Treaty, the Community shall implement a policy for the full integration of environmental policy in development policy and in other external policies which have an impact on development and environment policies. This policy shall be implemented in accordance with the European Parliament and Council Decision No. 2179/98/EC establishing a revised European Community programme of policy and action in relation to the environment and sustainable development "Towards sustainability" and any further decisions adopted pursuant to Article 130s (3) of the Treaty.

This policy shall have two components:

a strategy for integrating environment policy in the Community's development policy and in other policies which have an impact on development and environment policies;

measures to promote the full integration of environmental policy in the development process of developing countries.

These components shall be complementary and shall be pursued by the Commission in parallel, with the aim of ensuring that the Community as far as possible sets an example of best practice to developing countries.

For the purpose of Article -2, point a), the Commission shall carry out an environmental audit of existing Community development policy and shall establish those areas of activity in need of improvement or additional action.

It shall report to the European Parliament and the Council by 31 December 2000 at the latest on its findings, including a summary of the legislative and other initiatives which it proposes to take together with a timetable for their adoption. The report shall be accompanied in particular by appropriate proposals for the review and extension of the present Regulation.

The Commission shall ensure that appropriate attention is paid to the requirements of the present Article when it comes to propose its legislative work programme for the year 2002.

	
2a. For the purposes of this Regulation:

'sustainable development' means improving the quality of human life within the limits of the underlying ecosystem's capacity to support current and future generations,

2. They shall address:

- global environmental issues, in particular those addressed by multilateral environmental agreements, such as climate change, desertification and biological diversity;

-transboundary environmental issues, in particular air, soil, and water pollution;

- environmental impacts related to the integration of developing countries into the world economy;

- environmental impacts of macro-economic and sectoral policies in developing countries;

- the inclusion in development cooperation projects of an environmental component which distinguishes, identifies and assesses the sustainable dimension of these projects;

- sustainable management and use of natural and environmental resources in all sectors and in particular the productive sectors of the economy;

- environmental problems caused by the non-sustainable use of resources due to poverty;


- conservation of biological diversity, the sustainable use of its components, and the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising from the utilisation of genetic resources;

	
- the management of wetlands;

- Environmental impacts of non-sustainable forms of agriculture and the promotion of sustainable forms of agriculture;

- water-related issues;

- coastal zone management;

- desertification;

- town and country planning and in particular urban environment problems relating inter alia to transport, solid liquid and hazardous waste, air pollution and noise, waste water and the quality of drinking water;

- environmental problems related to industrial activities

- sustainable production and use of energy and in particular encouraging the use of renewable energy sources, increasing energy efficiency, energy saving and the replacement of especially damaging energy sources by others which are less so;

- sustainable patterns of production and consumption.

	
- information campaigns on hazardous substances and toxic waste and pesticides in particular;

	
- the promotion of trade in products that have been produced in a sustainable manner;

3. Activities eligible for financing include:

- pilot projects in the field including those involving environmentally-sound technologies adapted to local constraints and needs;

- schemes to build up the institutional and operational capacities of actors in the development process, i.e. government, NGOs, private sector, civil society, at national, regional and local level;

- the elaboration of policies, plans, strategies, programmes and projects for sustainable development;

	
- support for the elaboration of development priorities and self-development capacities of indigenous and local communities;

- the formulation of guidelines, operational manuals and instruments aimed at promoting sustainable development and environmental integration in particular in the form of public databases and databanksfor exemple on the internet (open to the public);

	
- observance of special environmental standards (in particular labels and certification);

- support to the development and application of environment assessment tools in the preparation and implementation of policies, strategies, programmes and projects;

- inventory, accounting and statistical work, in order to improve environmental data and environmental indicators;

- raising awareness of local populations and key actors in the development process and development co-operation with regard to the implications of sustainable development with particular reference to the problems arising from population growth, migration and relocation, in particular through information campaigns and training;

- support to multilateral processes.

4. Particular attention shall be given to :

- the linkage with the overall objective of eradicating poverty; in respect of the interrelationship between poverty and environment on both the level of the individual as well as the level of society as a whole for example in the cas of sustainable use of natural resources;

	
- regional projects or projects which help to strengthen regional cooperation in the area of sustainable development;

- local initiatives involving innovative measures aimed at sustainable development;

- prior information, active involvement and support of local populations, including indigenous communities;

- the specific role, knowledge, perspectives and contribution of women in the sustainable management and use of natural resources, based on gender analysis;

- the potential for integration into the wider context of Community development cooperation policies and programmes;

- the internalisation of environmental costs, including through economic instruments.

- the dynamics of the links between international environmental instruments and human rights;

5. Lesson-learning and dissemination of the results of the activities carried out will be essential elements of implementing this regulation.

Article 3

Aid recipients and cooperation partners shall include not only States and regions but also international organizations, decentralised departments, regional bodies, public agencies, indigenous and local communities, private operators and industries, including cooperatives and NGOs and associations representing local people.

Article 4

1. Community financing may cover studies, technical assistance, education, training or other services, supplies and works, small grant funds as well as appraisals, audits and evaluation and monitoring missions.

It may cover both investment, linked to a specific programme or project, with the exception of the purchase of buildings, and recurring expenditure (including administrative, maintenance and operating expenditure).

For projects aiming at the preservation of biological diversity or the conservation of ecosystems, the purchase of real estate shall be allowed with due respect for economic, social and cultural rights as well as land rights of the local population, and in particular of indigenous peoples.

However, apart from training, education and research programmes, such expenditure may as a general rule be covered only during the start-up period and the cover shall decrease gradually.

2. A contribution from the partners defined in Article 3 shall be sought for each cooperation operation. Their contribution shall be requested according to their means and the nature of the operation concerned.

2. In order to enhance the efficiency of this instrument and when the occasion arises the Commission shall give priority to those projects and programmes that are demanddriven i.e. those projects and programmes that meet the demands as formulated by the actors in the developing countries themselves.

In case only few demand-driven projects are presented to the Commission, the Commission may take action to stimulate initiatives that comply with the "demand" criteria, especially in the developing countries;

3. Opportunities may be sought for cofinancing with other donors, especially with Member States and the international organisations concerned. In this respect, a coordination with the measures taken by other donors shall be sought.

4. The necessary measures shall be taken to emphasise the Community character of the aid provided under this Regulation.

In order to establish sufficient flexibility in the distribution of funds between the eligible themes as set out in the financial memorandum of this regulation the indicative schedule shall be adjusted promptly if the indicated priorities are not in line with the future applications for financing from the developing countries;

5. In order to attain the objectives of consistency and complementarity laid down in the Treaty and with the aim of guaranteeing optimum efficiency for the totality of these operations, the Commission may take all coordination measures necessary, including in particular:

(a) the establishment of a system for the systematic exchange and analysis of information on operations financed or being considered for financing by the Community and the Member States;

(b) on-the-spot coordination of these operations by means of regular meetings and exchange of information between the representatives of the Commission and Member States in the beneficiary country, the representatives of the beneficiary countries and the local partners (NGOs, grassroots communities and associations).

( c) Coordination of operations financed under this regulation with operations financed by the European Union under other regulations or

programmes;

6. In order to obtain the greatest possible impact globally and nationally, the Commission, in liaison with the Member States, shall take any initiative necessary for ensuring proper coordination and close collaboration with the beneficiary countries and the providers of funds and other international agencies involved, in particular those forming part of the United Nations system.

Article 5

Financial support under this Regulation shall take the form of grants.

Notwithstanding the other measures that the Commission shall take to protect the Community's financial interests, bank or credit guarantees should not be required where such a requirement would effectively preclude the participation of the recipients and partners identified in Article 3.

Article 6

1. The Commission shall be responsible for appraising, deciding and administering operations covered by this Regulation according to the budgetary and other procedures in force, and in particular those laid down in the Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities.

2. Decisions relating to grants of more than EURO 5 million for individual operations financed under this Regulation and any changes resulting in an increase of more than 20% in the sum initially approved for such an operation shall be adopted under the procedure laid down in Article 7.

The Commission shall inform the Committee referred to in Article 7 succinctly of any financing decisions it intends to take with regard to projects and programmes of less than EURO 5 million in value. The information shall be made available not later than one week before the decision is taken.

3. The Commission shall be authorised to approve, without seeking the opinion of the Committee referred to in Article 7, any extra commitments needed for covering any expected or real cost overruns in connection with the operations, provided that the overrun or additional requirement is less than or equal to 20 % of the initial commitment fixed by the financing decision.

4. All financing agreements or contracts concluded under this Regulation shall provide for the Commission and the Court of Auditors to conduct on-the-spot checks according to the usual procedures laid down by the Commission under the rules in force, in particular those of the Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities.

5. Where operations are the subject of financing agreements between the Community and the recipient country, such agreements shall stipulate that the payment of taxes, duties or any other charges is not to be covered by the Community.

6. Participation in invitations to tender and the award of contracts shall be open on equal terms to all natural and legal persons of the Member States, the recipient countries and other developing countries.

7. Supplies should come from the Member States, the recipient country or other developing countries, in particular other countries in the region. Exceptions may be made by arrangement with the competent authorities, particularly in cases where the participants would otherwise incur higher costs or a disproportionate burden.



8. Particular attention will be given to:

- the pursuit of cost-effectiveness and sustainable impact of activities;

- the clear definition and monitoring of objectives and indicators of achievement for all activities.

	
8a. The horizontal nature of the projects under this Regulation requires the establishment of an environmental monitoring unit which will be responsible for the coordination, linking and integration of the various aspects of development cooperation projects in order to maximise investigation and follow-up.

Article 7

1. The representative of the Commission shall be assisted by the geographically-determined Committee competent for development.

2. The representative of the Commission shall submit to the committee a draft of the measures of a general nature to be taken. The committee shall deliver its opinion on the draft within a time limit, which the chairman may lay down according to the urgency of the matter, if necessary by taking a vote.

The opinion shall be recorded in the minutes; in addition each Member State shall have the right to ask to have its position recorded in the minutes.

The Commission shall take the utmost account of the opinion delivered by the committee. It shall inform the committee of the extent to which its opinion has been taken into account.

Article 8

An exchange of views shall take place once a year on the basis of a presentation by the representative of the Commission of the general guidelines for the operations to be carried out in the year ahead, in the framework of a joint meeting of the committees referred to in Article 7(1).

Article 9

1. By 1 September of each budget year, the Commission shall submit an annual report to the European Parliament and the Council, giving a list of the partners of co-funded operations and the percentage of co-funding, a summary of the operations financed in the course of that year and an evaluation, complete with figures, of the implementation of this egulation over that period.

This report shall contain information about the nature and quantity of the projects financed, the results obtained from the projects (or from earlier projects), those with whom contracts have been concluded and an overview of all the projects submitted and the reasons for the selection made.

2. The Commission shall regularly assess operations financed by the Community with a view to establishing whether the objectives aimed at by those operations have been achieved and to providing guidelines for improving the effectiveness of future operations. The Commission shall submit to the Committee referred to in Article 7 a summary of the assessments made which may, if appropriate, be examined by the Committee. The assessment reports shall be available to any Member States requesting them and the European Parliament if requested.

The report shall also include a quantified summary of any independent evaluations conducted of specific operations.

3. The Commission shall inform the Member States, at the latest one month after its decision, of the operations and projects that have been approved, stating their cost and nature, the recipient country and partners.

4. The financial guide, specifying the guidelines and criteria applicable to the selection of projects, shall be published and communicated to the interested parties by the Commission offices including Commission delegations in beneficiary countries.

5. The level of funding indicated under

Regulation n˚ 722/47 shall be taken as the indicative minimum for the annual implementation of the present Regulation. Budget appropriations may be used for technical assistance referred to in Article 4 (1) first sub-paragraph, within the limit established by the annual decision of the budgetary authority, to cover technical and administrative assistance costs related to operations other than the permanent tasks of the public administration.

This Regulation shall be implemented on a coherent basis, taking into account the general principles outlined in Regulation (EEC) 443/92 on financial and technical assistance to, and economic cooperation with the developing countries in Asia and Latin America under the ACP-EEC Convention and the current agreements with the southern Mediterranean countries, while also respecting the criteria common to all stages of projects from identification to assessment; these criteria shall be geared to the exchange of information, harmonisation of working methods and mutual cooperation at all stages of the project.

Article 10

1. This Regulation shall enter into force on the third day following of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Communities.

2. Four years after the entry into force of this Regulation, the Commission shall submit to the European Parliament and to the Council an overall assessment of the operations financed by the Community under this Regulation, together with suggestions concerning the future of this Regulation.

This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States.

(1) Decision No 2179/98/EC (OJ L 275, 10.10.1998, p. 5).

(2) OJ L 108, 25.4.1997, p. 1.