EUR-Lex - 52012PC0172 - EN

|

52012PC0172

Proposal for a REGULATION OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL on imports of rice originating in Bangladesh /* COM/2012/0172 final - 2012/0085 (COD) */

EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM

1.           CONTEXT OF THE PROPOSAL

The purpose of the proposal is to alignCouncil Regulation (EEC) No 3491/90 of 26 November 1990[1] on imports of rice originatingin Bangladesh with the differentiation between delegated and implementing powersof the Commission introduced by Articles 290 and 291 of the Treaty on theFunctioning of the European Union (TFEU).

2.           RESULTS OF CONSULTATIONSWITH THE INTERESTED PARTIES AND IMPACT ASSESSMENTS

Consultation of interested parties

Collection and use of expertise

There was no need for consultation ofinterested parties or for external expertise since the proposal to alignCouncil Regulation (EEC) No 3491/90 to the Lisbon Treaty is aninter-institutional matter that will concern all Council Regulations.

Impact assessment

No need for an impact assessment since theproposal to align Council Regulation (EEC) No 3491/90 to the Lisbon Treaty isan inter-institutional matter that will concern all Council Regulations.

3.           LEGAL ELEMENTS OF THEPROPOSAL

Summary of the proposed action

Identify the delegated and implementingpowers of the Commission in Council Regulation (EEC) No 3491/90 and establishthe corresponding procedure for adoption of these acts.

Legal basis

Article 207 of the Treaty on the Functioningof the European Union

Subsidiarity principle

Agricultural policy is of shared competencebetween the EU and the Member States. This means that as long as the EU doesnot legislate in the sector Member States maintain their competence. Thisproposal is limited to adapting the provisions on preferential imports of riceoriginating in Bangladesh to new requirements introduced by the Lisbon Treaty.Thus the existing Union approach is not affected by this Proposal.

Proportionality principle

The proposal complies with theproportionality principle.

Choice of instruments

Proposed instrument: Regulation of theEuropean Parliament and of the Council.

Other means would not be adequate for thefollowing reason: direct application is due to the nature of the CAP and itsmanagement requirements an indispensable characteristic of CAP legislation.

4.           BUDGETARY IMPLICATION

This measure has no budgetary implications.

2012/0085 (COD)

Proposal for a

REGULATION OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENTAND OF THE COUNCIL

on imports of rice originating inBangladesh

THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THECOUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION,

Having regard to the Treaty on theFunctioning of the European Union, and in particular Article 207 thereof,

Having regard to the proposal from theEuropean Commission[2],

After transmission of the draft legislativeact to the national Parliaments,

Acting in accordance with the ordinarylegislative procedure,

Whereas:

(1)       In the context of theUruguay round, the Union has undertaken to offer preferential importarrangements for rice originating in the least–developed countries. One of thecountries to which the offer was addressed, Bangladesh, indicated its interestin the development of trade in rice. To that end, Council Regulation (EEC) No 3491/90of 26 November 1990 on imports of rice originating in Bangladesh[3] has been adopted.

(2)       Regulation (EEC) No3491/90 confers powers on the Commission in order to implement some of itsprovisions. As a consequence of the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty, thosepowers need to be aligned to Articles 290 and 291 of the Treaty on theFunctioning of the European Union (the Treaty). For the sake of clarity it isappropriate to repeal Regulation (EEC) No 3491/90 and to replace it with a newRegulation.

(3) In order to ensure the reliability and the efficiency of the preferential import arrangement, the power to adopt acts in accordance with Article 290 of the Treaty should be delegated to the Commission to establish rules making the participation in the arrangement conditional upon the lodging of a security in line with Commission Regulation (EC) No 1964/2006 of 22 December 2006 laying down detailed rules for the opening and administration of an import quota for rice originating in Bangladesh, pursuant to Council Regulation (EEC) No 3491/901. It is of particular importance that the Commission carry out appropriate consultations during its preparatory work, including at expert level. The Commission, when preparing and drawing up delegated acts, should ensure a simultaneous, timely and appropriate transmission of relevant documents to the European Parliament and to the Council.

(4) In order to ensure uniform conditions for the adoption of certain measures for the implementation of this Regulation, implementing powers should be conferred on the Commission. Those powers, save where explicitly provided otherwise, should be exercised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and the Council of 16 February 2011 laying down the rules and general principles concerning mechanisms for control by Member states of the Commission's exercise of implementing powers . However, where the suspension of the preferential import arrangement becomes necessary, the Commission should adopt an implementing act without applying Regulation (EU) No 182/2011.

(5)       The preferential importarrangements involve a reduction of the import duty within the limits of acertain quantity of husked rice. The equivalent quantities at stages of millingother than that of husked rice should be calculated in accordance with CommissionRegulation (EC) No 1312/2008 of 19 December 2008 fixing the conversion rates,the processing costs and the value of the by-products for the various stages ofrice processing[5].

(6)       In order to fix the importduties applicable to rice originating in Bangladeshimported under this Regulation, account should be taken of the relevantprovisions of Regulation No XXXX/XXXX of the EuropeanParliament and of the Council establishing a common organisation ofagricultural markets and on specific provisions for certain agriculturalproducts (Single CMO Regulation)[6].

(7) To ensure the advantages of the preferential import arrangements are limited only to rice originating in Bangladesh, a certificate of origin should be issued.

	
(7a) This Regulation is part of the Union's common commercial policy, which must be consistent with the objectives of the Union policy in the field of development cooperation as set out in Article 208 of the Treaty, in particular the eradication of poverty and the promotion of sustainable development and good governance in the developing countries. As such, it should also comply with World Trade Organization (WTO) requirements, in particular with the Decision on Differential and More Favourable Treatment, Reciprocity and Fuller Participation of Developing Countries (the 'Enabling Clause'), adopted under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in 1979, under which WTO Members may accord differential and more favourable treatment to developing countries,

(7b) This Regulation is also based on the recognition of the right of small farmers and rural workers to a decent income and to a safe and healthy working environment as fundamental in relation to achieving the general objectives of granting trade preferences to developing countries and least developed countries in particular. The Union aims to define and pursue common policies and actions in order to foster the sustainable economic, social and environmental development of developing countries, with the primary aim of eradicating poverty. In this context, ratification and effective implementation of core international conventions on human and labour rights, environmental protection and good governance are essential, as reflected by the special incentive arrangement providing for additional tariff preferences under Regulation (EU) No 978/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 applying a scheme of generalised tariff preferences1,



HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:

Article 1

Scope

1.           This Regulationestablishes a preferential import arrangement for imports of rice originatingin Bangladesh falling within CN codes 1006 10 (excluding CN code 1006 10 10),1006 20 and 1006 30.

2.           The preferential importarrangement shall be limited, by calendar year, to a quantity equivalent to 4000 tonnes of husked rice.    The quantities at stages of milling other than the husked-rice stage shall beconverted using the conversion rates fixed in Article 1 of Regulation (EC) No1312/2008.

3. The Commission shall adopt an implementing act suspending the application of the preferential import arrangement provided for in paragraph 1 of this Article once it ascertains that, during the year in progress, imports qualifying under the said arrangement have reached the quantity indicated in paragraph 2 of this Article. That implementing act shall be adopted without applying the procedure referred to in Article 5a(2).

Article 2

Import duty

1.           Within the limits of thequantity laid down in Article 1(2), the import duty on rice shall be equal:

— for paddy rice falling within CN codes 100610, with the exception of CN code 1006 10 10, to the customs duties fixed inthe Common Customs Tariff, less 50 % and less a further EUR 4,34;

— for husked rice falling within CN code 100620, to the duty fixed in accordance with Article 242 of the Regulation NoXXXX/XXXX , less 50 % and less a further EUR 4,34;

— for semi-milled and milled rice fallingwithin CN code 1006 30, to the duty fixed pursuant to Article 244 of theRegulation No XXXX/XXXX, less EUR 16,78, less a further 50 % and less EUR 6,52.


1a. This Regulation recognises the right of small farmers and rural workers to a decent income and to a safe and healthy working environment and regards respect for that right as fundamental in relation to achieving the general objectives of granting trade preferences to developing countries and least developed countries in particular.

2.           Paragraph 1 shall apply subjectto the following conditions:


(b)     that the competent authority ofBangladesh has issued a certificate of origin

Article 3

Delegated powers

The Commission shall be empowered to adoptdelegated acts in accordance with Article 4 laying down rules making theparticipation in the preferential import arrangement established in Article 1 conditionalupon the lodging of a security.

Article 4

Exercise of the delegation

1.           The power to adoptdelegated acts is conferred on the Commission subject to the conditions laiddown in this Article.

2. The power to adopt delegated acts referred to in Article 3 shall be conferred on the Commission for a period of five years from ...*. The Commission shall draw up a report in respect of the delegation of power not later than nine months before the end of the five-year period. The delegation of power shall be tacitly extended for periods of an identical duration, unless the European Parliament or the Council opposes such extension not later than three months before the end of each period.

3.           The delegation of powerreferred to in Article 3 may be revoked at any time by the European Parliamentor by the Council. A decision to revoke shall put an end to the delegation ofthe power specified in that decision. It shall take effect the day followingthe publication of the decision in the Official Journal of the EuropeanUnion or at a later date specified therein. It shall not affect thevalidity of any delegated acts already in force.

4.           As soon as it adopts adelegated act, the Commission shall notify it simultaneously to the EuropeanParliament and to the Council.

5. A delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 3 shall enter into force only if no objection has been expressed either by the European Parliament or the Council within a period of two months of notification of that act to the European Parliament and the Council or if, before the expiry of that period, the European Parliament and the Council have both informed the Commission that they will not object. That period shall be extended by four months at the initiative of the European Parliament or of the Council.

Article 5

Implementing powers

The Commission shall, by means of implementingacts, adopt the necessary measures concerning:

(a)          the administrative method to beused for the management of the preferential import arrangement ;

(b)          the means for determining theorigin of the product covered by the preferential import arrangement;

(c)          the form and period of validityof the certificate of origin referred to in Article 2(2);

(d)          the nature of the proofs requiredto establish that the export tax referred to in Article 2 (2) has been paid ;

(e)          the period of validity of theimport licences, where appropriate;

(f)           the amount of the securityrequired to be lodged in accordance with Article 3;

(g)          the notifications to be made tothe Commission by Member States.

Those implementing acts shall be adopted inaccordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article [323(2)] ofRegulation (EU) No [xxxx/xxxx] of the European Parliament and of the Council (SingleCMO Regulation).

1. The Commission shall be assisted by the Committee for the Common Organisation of the Agricultural Markets established by Article [323(1)] of Regulation (EU) No [xxxx/yyyy ] of the European Parliament and of the Council of ..... establishing a common organisation of agricultural markets and on specific provisions for certain agricultural products [Single CMO Regulation]1. That Committee shall be a committee within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011.

 

2. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply.

 

3. Where the opinion of the committee is to be obtained by written procedure, that procedure shall be terminated without result when, within the time-limit for delivery of the opinion, the chair of the committee so decides or a majority of committee members so request.

Article 6

Repeal

Regulation (EEC) No 3491/90 is repealed.

References to Regulation (EEC) No 3491/90shall be construed as references to this Regulation and be read in accordancewith the correlation table set out in the Annex to this Regulation.

Article 7

Entry into force

This Regulation shall enter into force onthe day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of theEuropean Union.

This Regulation shall be bindingin its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States.

Done at Brussels,

For the European Parliament                       Forthe Council

The President                                                 ThePresident

ANNEX

CORRELATIONTABLE REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 6

Regulation (EEC) No 3491/90 || This Regulation

Article 1 || Article 2

Article 2(1) || Article 1(2)

Article 2(2) || Article 1(3)

Article 3 || Articles 3, 4 and 5

[1]               OJ L 337, 4.12.1990, p. 1. Regulation as amended byRegulation (EC) No 1532/2007 (OJ L 337, 21.12.2007, p. 19)

[2]               OJ C […], […], p. […].

[3]               OJ L 337, 4.12.1990, p. 1.

[4]               OJ L 55, 28.2.2011, p.13.

[5]               OJ L 344, 20.12.2008, p. 56

[6]               OJ L […], […], p. […].