@import url(./../../../../css/com/com-c.css)

EUROPEAN COMMISSION

Strasbourg, 29.5.2018

COM(2018) 372 final

2018/0197(COD)

Proposal for a

REGULATION OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL

on the European Regional Development Fund and on the Cohesion Fund

{SEC(2018) 268 final}

{SWD(2018) 282 final}

{SWD(2018) 283 final}

EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM

1.

CONTEXT OF THE PROPOSAL

On 2 May 2018, the Commission adopted a proposal for the next multi-annual financial framework for the period 2021-2027

. This includes the European Regional Development Fund ('ERDF') and the Cohesion Fund.

Administrative simplification has been defined as a key objective in reflection paper on EU finances as well as the ex post evaluation and the public consultation. Experience suggests that the rules are overcomplex and fragmented, leading to an unnecessary burden on programme managers and final beneficiaries.

To enable consistency

with other EU policies under shared management, the rules on delivery and implementation of ERDF and the Cohesion Fund are governed as far as possible by the Common Provisions Regulation ('CPR'). This sets out common provisions for seven shared management funds at the EU level:

·

CF:

Cohesion Fund

·

EMFF:

European Maritime and Fisheries Fund

·

ERDF:

European Regional Development Fund

·

ESF+:

European Social Fund Plus

·

AMIF:

Asylum and Migration Fund

·

ISF:

Internal Security Fund

·

BMVI:

Border Management and Visa Instrument

To enable consistency with Horizon Europe, this latter will focus on "European excellence" (the generation and exploitation of new knowledge) while ERDF will focus on "regional relevance" (diffusion of existing knowledge and technology to places that need it, embedding it locally via smart specialization strategies).

To enable consistency with the Connecting Europe Facility (CEF), there is enhanced synergy and complementarity where the CEF will focus in particular on the "core network" while the  the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund will also provide support for the "comprehensive network", including ensuring regional and local access thereto as well as transport connections within urban areas.

To simplify and clarify the legislation, this Regulation defines provisions applicable to both ERDF and Cohesion Fund intervening under the "Investment for jobs and growth" goal and, with regard to the ERDF, under the "European territorial cooperation" goal (Interreg).

However, due to the specific nature of programmes under the "European territorial cooperation" goal (Interreg) which involve several Member States and third countries, a specific regulation on the "European territorial cooperation" goal (Interreg) Regulation sets out specific rules additional to the Common Provisions Regulation and this Regulation.

This proposal provides for a date of application as of 1 January 2021 and are presented for a Union of 27 Member States, in line with the notification by the United Kingdom of its intention to withdraw from the European Union and Euratom based on Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union received by the European Council on 29 March 2017.

2.

LEGAL BASIS, SUBSIDIARITY AND PROPORTIONALITY

EU action is justified by Article 174 of The Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ('TFEU'): "The Union shall develop and pursue its actions leading to the strengthening of its economic, social and territorial cohesion. In particular, the Union shall aim at reducing disparities between the levels of development of the various regions and the backwardness of the least favoured regions".

The aims of the ERDF are set out in Article 176 TFEU: "The European Regional Development Fund is intended to help to redress the main regional imbalances in the Union through participation in the development and structural adjustment of regions whose development is lagging behind and in the conversion of declining industrial regions".

The aims of the Cohesion Fund are set out in Article 177 TFEU: "A Cohesion Fund set up in accordance with the same procedure shall provide a financial contribution to projects in the fields of environment and trans-European networks in the area of transport infrastructure".

In addition, Article 174 TFEU mandates particular attention to rural areas, areas affected by industrial transition, and regions which suffer from severe and permanent natural or demographic handicaps such as the northernmost regions with very low population density and island, cross-border and mountain regions.

Article 349 TFEU mandates specific measures to take account of the structural social and economic situation of the outermost regions, which is compounded by certain specific features that severely restrain their development.

Subsidiarity and proportionality

The impact assessment

identified various reasons why action at EU level adds value to action at national level. These include:

·

In many countries, the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund represent at least 50% of public investment – these Member States would not otherwise have the

financial capacity to make such investments

.

·

There are significant potential

spillovers

across national and regional boundaries, for example for investments in innovation and SMEs. The EU level has an important role in delivering these spillovers and preventing underinvestment. Moreover, investments need to be designed to maximise spillovers.

·

In most regions, including more developed ones,

smart specialisation strategies

(RIS3) represent a consistent strategic framework for investments and bring about high added value. These were triggered by the strategic programming requirement for ERDF support and the corresponding pre-condition. In fact, the benefits of such strategies tend to be highest in the most developed regions (particularly in the Nordic countries, Austria, Germany, Benelux and France).

·

Promotion of EU priorities

, including structural reforms of labour market, transport, environment, climate change adaptation and mitigation, energy, education and social policies and programmes, as well as administrative modernisation.

·

The ERDF and the Cohesion Fund deliver

tangible results in areas which matter to European citizens

- "The EU budget helps to deliver on the things that matter for Europeans"

. Helping regions adapt to the challenge of globalisation, creating 420,000 jobs and supporting 1.1 million SMEs

, tackling urban poverty – all these are priorities for Europeans. It is noteworthy that many of these results are particularly evident outside the cohesion countries.

Moreover, the policy choices in the Regulation are proportionate, for reasons including:

·

Shared management: programmes are not managed directly by the European Commission, but

instead implemented in partnership with the Member States.

·

The combined rules (the associated CPR plus this Regulation) are substantially simpler and

consolidated compared to the previous period.

3.

RESULTS OF EX-POST EVALUATIONS, STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATIONS AND IMPACT ASSESSMENTS

Ex post

evaluation

In terms of the strategy, priorities and impact of the policy, the ex post evaluation noted:

·

Support to SMEs has high potential impact. However, s

upport should focus more on helping dynamic SMEs grow, on smart specialisation strategies and facilitating regions to move up the economic chain, rather than trying to maintain the economy of the past.

·

Certain activities tend to have low impact, such as support to large enterprises (the most effective strategy to attract large enterprises is not through financial incentives but by improving local conditions such as the local business environment, etc.).

Similarly, a

irport investments have tended to perform poorly – only in the outermost regions can a strong case be made.

·

High added value contributions in themes such as the low carbon economy, sustainable urban development and regional co-operation.

These issues have been taken on board in the present ERDF and the Cohesion Fund Regulation which:

·

Maintains thematic concentration, with the top priorities: support to innovation, digital economy and SMEs delivered through a smart specialisation strategy;

the low carbon and circular economy in line with the overall 25 % commitment for the climate objective.

·

Makes a list of activities not to be supported, including direct support to large enterprises, airport infrastructure (outside the outermost regions) and some waste management operations (e.g. landfills).

·

Further develops regional cooperation and sustainable urban development.

In addition, the

ex post

evaluation had various lessons for the delivery system (including simplification, flexibility, financial instruments). These are taken on board in the CPR.

Stakeholder consultation

An online public consultation took place between 10 January and 9 March 2018. The consultation covered cohesion policy, i.e. ERDF and the Cohesion Fund combined with ESF.

·

In terms of the most important challenges, the largest proportion (94% of respondents) identified ‘reducing regional disparities’ as very important or rather important, followed by ‘reducing unemployment, quality jobs and labour mobility’ and ‘promoting social inclusion and combating poverty’ (91%).

·

On the challenges, ‘Fostering research and innovation’ was regarded as the most successfully addressed (by 61%), followed by ‘territorial cooperation’ (59%).

·

Some 76% of respondents considered that the funds add value to a large or fairly large extent and under 2% that they have no added-value at all.

·

For preventing the achievement of objectives, complex procedures were seen by a long way as the most important obstacle (86%), followed by audit and control procedures (68%), and lack of flexibility to react to unforeseen circumstances (60%).

·

For simplification, the most frequent choice was ‘fewer, clearer, shorter rules’ (90%), followed by ‘alignment of rules between EU funds’ (79%) and ‘increased flexibility’, in terms of allocating resources both to and within a programme area (76-77%).

In answering the open questions, respondents on balance strongly supported:

·

Cohesion policy for all regions (though with a continued focus on the less developed).

·

Policy innovation, including smart specialisation strategies and smart investment more generally.

·

The continuation and development of thematic concentration.

·

A focus on local challenges (especially sustainable urban development).

·

Interregional cooperation, both cross-border and across Europe. Co-operation at the EU level is essential for smart specialisation – innovation in high tech sectors often depends on exchanges and spill-overs from cooperation between clusters or knowledge hubs across Europe.

These issues are addressed in the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund Regulation which:

·

Continues to focus on tackling regional disparities and the challenges facing regions across Europe.

·

Continues and enhances thematic concentration on smart growth via smart specialisation strategies and on the low-carbon and circular economy.

·

Maintains support for inter-regional cooperation, extending this to smart specialisation.

·

Promotes local development based on integrated territorial and local strategies and encourages sustainable urban development as well as capacity building in this field.

In addition, the CPR Regulation will provide a framework for the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund to:

·

Simplify the complex procedures associated with the ERDF and Cohesion Fund.

·

Increase flexibility to respond to emerging challenges.

·

Align rules between the various EU funds covered.

Impact assessment

This proposal is supported by an impact assessment. However, the main options and preferred option can only be finalised and the economic impacts assessed once the financial envelopes and allocation mechanism are decided.

The options deal with a 7% reduction in the budget by:

·

Option 1: A cut across the board

·

Option 2: Reducing the contribution to the more developed regions.

·

Option 3: Maintaining support in key areas (thematic concentration) and reduction in other themes.

Option 3 is the preferred option, for reasons including:

·

To maintain a focus on the themes of highest EU added value, where evaluation evidence suggests the policy has had the highest impact.

·

Many of the greatest challenges (globalisation and economic transformation, transition to the low carbon and circular economy, environmental challenges, migration and pockets of urban poverty) increasingly affect many regions across the EU, including more developed ones. EU investment is both necessary and a sign of solidarity.

·

Maintaining critical mass - investments in the more developed regions are already small in per capita terms.

·

A vast majority of stakeholders in the public consultation support ERDF in all regions. This scenario ensures also better visibility of cohesion policy funds in all Member States.

The report was submitted twice to the Regulatory Scrutiny Board and received the following comments:

RSB opinion

How addressed

Round 1: Negative opinion

(1)

The report does not consider implications of reducing ERDF and CF funding capacities.

(2)

The report does not explain how changed objectives and allocation criteria

would redirect the programme.

(3)

It does not consider possible (sub-) options for geographic coverage, regional eligibility and means for financial allocations under the ERDF/CF.

(4)

The report does not sufficiently explore implications of changes to the delivery mechanisms.

(1) A 10% cut in funding is now modelled in section 3.2, using three different options.

(2) The text and graphs of section 3.2 show how the programme would be redirected under the various options.

(3) Three options for geographic and thematic allocations are outlined in section 3.2, with indications of the main line of redirection.

(4) The chapter on delivery mechanisms has been developed along the lines requested by the RSB (see section on comment 8 below).

Round 2: positive opinion, with the following reservations:

(1) The content and the implications of the preferred option (thematic concentration) are not sufficiently clear. The revised report does not provide sufficient evidence that thematic concentration will contribute to reducing regional and national disparities.

(2) The report does not spell out future modalities for the implementation of the 'Berlin method' for financial allocation and reasons for not considering alternative options.

(3) The report does not describe the scope and the potential impacts of a European cross-border mechanism.

(4) The report does not clarify the consistency/complementarity between the ERDF/CF and the new Reform Support Programme.

(1) The content of all options is now spelled out on pages 28-29 and compared in tabular form in table 7. Figure 5 considers the thematic impact of the preferred option by Member State. The impacts of the various options on regional and national growth rates are examined and compared by the QUEST macroeconomic model in the text on pages 30-31 as well as in the numbers in table 9 and figures 6 and 7.

(2) The Berlin method is now described in a box on page 29, along with the reasons for retaining this method and not considering alternative options.

(3) The cross-border mechanism is described on pages 41-42. A report on potential impacts is quoted and the source footnoted.

(4) The relationship with the reform support programme is now detailed on page 60.

Simplification

There is evidence of substantial administrative costs associated with the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund, estimated in a recent study

at 3% of average programme costs for the ERDF and 2.2% for the Cohesion Fund. The administrative burden on beneficiaries (including SMEs) are higher.

Most of the measures simplifying ERDF and Cohesion Fund will be created by the CPR. Many are difficult to quantify financially in advance, but the study estimated that:

·

Greater use of simplified cost options (or payments based on conditions) for the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund could substantially reduce total administrative costs – by 20-25% if these options are applied across the board.

·

The more proportionate approach to control and audits would imply a major reduction

in the number of verifications and

the audit burden for 'low risk' programmes. This would reduce total administrative costs of the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund by 2-3% and costs for affected programmes by a much greater amount.

E-cohesion and data exchange

The 2014-2020 programmes required a system of electronic data exchange between beneficiaries and managing authorities as well as between different authorities of the management and control system. This Regulation builds on this and develops further certain aspects in terms of gathering data. All data necessary for monitoring progress in implementation including results and performance of programmes will now be transmitted electronically and every two months, meaning the open data platform will be updated in almost real time.

Beneficiary and operations data will similarly be made public in electronic form, on a website run by the managing authority.

4.

BUDGETARY IMPLICATIONS

The Commission's proposal for a multi-annual financial framework foresees an amount of EUR 273 billion for the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund for the period 2021-2027.

ERDF and CF envelope for 2021-2027 in millions

ERDF and CF total

241 978

European Regional Development Fund (ERDF)

200 629

·

Investment for jobs and growth

190 752

·

European territorial cooperation

8 430

·

Outermost regions and sparsely populated areas

1 447

Cohesion Fund (CF)

41 349

·

of which contribution to CEF Transport

10 000

5.

SUMMARY OF THE CONTENT OF THE REGULATION

Much of the delivery and implementation of the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund is covered in the CPR. This Regulation should therefore be seen in that context and the main focus is on key strategic issues, notably:

·

The main priorities and themes targeted.

·

The indicator framework to track this.

·

The approach to specific territories, including sustainable urban development, as well as the outermost regions.

Chapter I – Common provisions

Intervention approach

The ERDF and the Cohesion Fund Regulation takes the policy objectives set in the CPR and develops them into specific objectives of relevance to the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund, which can be tracked with appropriate indicators.

It also defines a limited list of non-eligible activities that fall outside the intervention scope of the Funds. The scope of the Funds and the list of non-eligible activities aim to ensure that investment support is consistent with evaluation evidence and with the political and sustainability objectives of the European Union: landfills, airport infrastructure, the tobacco industry, decommissioning of nuclear facilities will not be supported.

Thematic concentration

In order to ensure that, in a context of budget reduction, there is still a critical mass of investment, the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund Regulation maintains requirements for thematic concentration. The majority (65% to 85%) of resources will be concentrated on contributing to the policy objectives which evaluation evidence and the impact assessment suggest have the highest added value, as well as the greatest contribution to EU priorities:

·

PO1:"a smarter Europe by promoting innovative and smart economic transformation";

·

PO2: "a greener, low-carbon Europe by promoting clean and fair energy transition, green and blue investment, the circular economy, climate adaptation and risk prevention and management".

In order to enable flexibility, thematic concentration criteria will apply at national level.

For countries with:

minimum % "PO1"

minimum % "PO2"

GNI below 75%

35%

30%

GNI 75-100%

45%

30%

GNI above 100%

60%

not applicable

PO1 and PO2 min. 85%

Indicators

In order to ensure consistent monitoring of progress towards performance the Regulation also maintains and refines the common set of output indicators, while adding for the first time a common set of results indicators. These latter enable reporting results in real time on the Open Data Platform and comparison across programmes and Member States. They will also feed into discussions on performance and successful evaluations and facilitate tracking for obligations related to EU legislation.

Evaluations will be carried out in line with paragraphs 22 and 23 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 13 April 2016

, where the three institutions confirmed that evaluations of existing legislation and policy should provide the basis for impact assessments of options for further action. The evaluations will assess programme effects on the ground based on the programme indicators/targets and a detailed analysis of the degree to which the programme is relevant, effective, efficient, provides EU added value and is coherent with other EU policies.

Evaluations will include lessons learned, problems and opportunities to further improve the actions and their impacts.

Chapter II – Specific provisions on the treatment of particular territorial features

The Regulation also provides for an increased focus on sustainable urban development by dedicating 6% of ERDF resources to this area, delivered through territorial instruments. Integrated territorial and local development strategies are expected to ensure coherence in interventions. In order to facilitate and support capacity building of actors, innovative actions, knowledge, policy development and communication in the area of sustainable urban development, the Regulation also provides for the setting up of a European Urban Initiative to be managed by the Commission.

All urban tools are combined in a single programme (the European Urban Initiative) implemented under direct or indirect management to provide a coherent product to cities. This includes exchanges, capacity building, pilot actions, and communication.

The Regulation also sets out special measures to accommodate the specific situation of outermost regions. These include schemes to offset transport costs and investments. The thematic concentration requirements are also less stringent for these regions than the nationally applicable rates would suggest.

2018/0197 (COD)

Proposal for a

REGULATION OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL

on the European Regional Development Fund and on the Cohesion Fund

THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION,

Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular the second paragraph of Article 177, Article 178 and Article 349 thereof,

Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission,

After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national parliaments,

Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee

,

Having regard to the opinion of the Committee of the Regions

,

Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure,

Whereas:

(1)

Article 176 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ('TFEU') provides that the European Regional Development Fund ('ERDF') is intended to help to redress the main regional imbalances in the Union. Under that Article and the second and third paragraphs of Article 174 of the TFEU, the ERDF is to contribute to reducing disparities between the levels of development of the various regions and to reducing the backwardness of the least favoured regions, among which particular attention is to be paid to regions which suffer from severe and permanent natural or demographic handicaps such as the northernmost regions with very low population density and island, cross-border and mountain regions.

(2)

The Cohesion Fund was set up in order to contribute to the overall objective of strengthening economic, social and territorial cohesion of the Union by providing financial contributions in the fields of environment and trans-European networks in the area of transport infrastructure ('TEN-T'),

as set out in Regulation (EU) No 1315/2013

of the European Parliament and of the Council

.

(3)  Regulation (EU) 2018/XXX of the European Parliament and of the Council [new CPR]1 sets out common rules applicable to various funds including the European Regional Development Fund ('ERDF'), the European Social Fund Plus ('ESF+'), the Cohesion Fund, the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD), the European Maritime and Fisheries Fund ('EMFF'), the Asylum and Migration Fund ('AMIF'), the Internal Security Fund ('ISF') and the Border Management and Visa Instrument ('BMVI') which operate under a common framework ('the Funds').

(3 a)  Member States and the Commission shall ensure the coordination, complementarity and coherence between the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), the Cohesion Fund (CF), the European Social Development Fund+ (ESF+), the European Maritime and Fisheries Fund (EMFF) and the European Fund for Agricultural Development (EAFRD), so that they can complement each other where this is beneficial for creating successful projects.



(4)

In order to simplify the rules applicable to both the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund for the 2014-2020 programming period, a single Regulation should set out the applicable rules covering both funds.

(5)  Horizontal principles as set out in Article 3 of the Treaty on European Union ('TEU') and in Article 10 of the TFEU, including principles of subsidiarity and proportionality as set out in Article 5 of the TEU, should be respected in the implementation of the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund, taking into account the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and the European Pillar of Social Rights. Member States and the Commission should aim at eliminating social and income inequalities, at furthering the fight against poverty, at the preservation and promoting the creation of quality jobs with attendant rights and at ensuring that the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund promote equal opportunities for all, combating discrimination based on gender, racial or ethnic origin, religion or belief, disability, age or sexual orientation. The funds should also promote the transition from institutional care to family and community-based care, in particular for those who face multiple discrimination. The Funds should not support actions that contribute to any form of segregation. Investments under the ERDF, in synergy with ESF+, should contribute to promoting social inclusion and fighting poverty, and to raising citizens’ quality of life in line with the obligations of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) to contribute to children’s rights.

(6)

It is necessary to cover provisions for the ERDF for its support both to the Investment for jobs and growth goal and the European territorial cooperation goal (Interreg) (‘ETC/Interreg’).

(7)

In order to identify the type of activities which can be supported by the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund, specific policy objectives for providing support from those funds should be laid down to ensure that they contribute to one or more of common policy objectives set out in Article 4(1) of Regulation (EU) 2018/xxx [new CPR] .

(8)  In an increasingly interconnected world and in view of the internal and external demographic and migration dynamics, it is clear that Union migration policy requires a common approach that relies on the synergies and complementarities of the different funding instruments. The ERDF must pay more specific attention to demographic change as a key challenge and priority area in devising and implementing programmes. In order to ensure coherent, strong and consistent support for solidarity and responsibility as well as sharing efforts between Member States in managing migration, cohesion policy could contribute to integration processes of refugees and migrants under international protection by adopting an approach aimed at protecting the dignity and rights of them, not least in view of the mutually-reinforcing relationship between integration and local economic growth, especially by providing infrastructure support to cities and local authorities involved in implementing integration policies;

(9)  In order to support the efforts of Member States and regions in reducing disparities between levels of development and harmonise different situations of EU regions, facing up to social disparities, new challenges and ensuring inclusive societies and a high level of security as well as the prevention of marginalisation and radicalisation, while relying on the synergies and complementarities with other Union policies, investments under the ERDF should contribute in areas where there is a need to ensure safe, modern, accessible and secure public spaces and critical infrastructure, such as communication, public transport, energy and universal, high-quality public services which are vital to address regional and social disparities, promote social cohesion and regional development and encourage enterprises and people to stay in their local area.

(10)  In addition, investments under the ERDF should contribute to the development of a comprehensive high-speed digital infrastructure network, throughout the Union, including in rural areas where it is a vital contributor to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), and to promoting pollution-free and sustainable multimodal mobility with a focus on walking, cycling, public transport and shared mobility.


 

(10 a)  Many of the greatest challenges in Europe increasingly affect marginalised Roma communities, who often live in the most disadvantaged micro-regions which lack safe and accessible drinking water, sewage, electricity, and which do not enjoy transportation possibilities, digital connectivity, renewable energy systems or disaster resilience. Therefore, ERDF-CF shall contribute to improving the living conditions of Roma and fulfilling their true potential as EU citizens, and Member States shall safeguard that the benefits of all the five policy objectives of ERDF-CF will reach the Roma as well.



(11)

As a result of the overall aim of the Cohesion Fund provided for in the TFEU, it is necessary to set out and limit the specific objectives to which the Cohesion Fund should support.

(12)  In order to contribute to an appropriate governance, enforcement, cross-border cooperation and spread of best practices and innovations in the field of smart specialization and circular economy improve the overall administrative capacity of the institutions and governance in the Member States, including at the regional and local levels on the principles of multilevel governance, implementing the programmes under the Investment for jobs and growth goal, it is necessary to promote administrative reinforcement measures of a structural nature in support of all specific objectives. Being based on measurable objectives and notified to citizens and businesses as a means of simplifying and reducing the administrative burden imposed on beneficiaries and managing authorities, it is possible for these measures to strike the right balance between the result-orientation of the policy and the level of checks and controls.

(13)  In order to encourage and boost cooperation measures, within programmes implemented under the Investment for jobs and growth goal, it is necessary to enhance cooperation measures with partners including those at local and regional level within a given Member State or between different Member States in relation to support provided under all of the specific objectives. Such enhanced cooperation is additional to the cooperation under ETC/Interreg and should in particular support cooperation among structured partnerships with a view to implementing regional strategies as referred to in the Communication from the Commission ‘Strengthening Innovation in Europe's Regions: Strategies for resilient, inclusive and sustainable growth’1 . Partners may therefore come from any region in the Union, but may also include cross-border regions and regions which are all covered by European Groupings of Territorial Cooperation, a macro-regional or sea-basin strategy or a combination of the two.

(13a)  The future cohesion policy may take adequate consideration of and provide support to the regions of the Union that are most impacted by the consequences of the United Kingdom’s exit from the Union, in particular those that will, as a result, find themselves situated on external sea or land borders of the Union;

(14)  The objectives of the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund should be pursued in the framework of sustainable development, notably the highly importance of tackling climate change in line with the Union's commitments to implement the Paris Agreement, 2030 Agenda of the United Nations and the UN Sustainable Development Goals as well as and the Union's promotion of the aim of preserving, protecting and improving the quality of the environment as set out in Articles 11 and 191(1) of the TFEU, taking into account the polluter pays principle as well as focusing on poverty, inequality and a just transition to a socially and environmentally sustainable economy in a participatory approach in cooperation with relevant public authorities, economic, and social partners as well as civil society organisations. Reflecting the importance of tackling climate change and loss of biodiversity in order to contribute to the financing of necessary actions to be taken at EU, national and local level to fulfil in line with the Union's commitments to implement the Paris Agreement and the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals, as well as to ensure integrated disaster prevention support linking resilience and risk prevention, preparation and response, the Funds will contribute to mainstream climate actions and biodiversity protection by targeting 30 % of the EU budget expenditure supporting climate objectives. The Funds must contribute substantially to the achievement of a circular and low-carbon economy in all territories of the Union and fully incorporating the regional dimension. Operations under the ERDF should contribute to at least 35 % of the overall financial envelope of the ERDF to climate objectives. Operations under the Cohesion Fund are expected to contribute 40 % of the overall financial envelope of the Cohesion Fund to climate objectives. These percentages should be respected throughout the programming period. Therefore, relevant actions will be identified during the preparation and implementation of these funds, and reassessed in the context of the relevant evaluations and review procedures. These actions and the financial allocation reserved for their implementation are to be included in the national Integrated Energy and Climate Plans in accordance with Annex IV of Regulation (EU)2018/xxxx[new CPR] as well as long-term renovation strategy established under the revised Energv Performance of Building Directive (E) 2018/844 to contribute to the achievement of a decarbonised building stock by 2050, and attached to the Programmes. Specific attention should be paid to carbon-intensive areas facing challenges due to decarbonisation commitments, in view of assisting them in pursuing strategies consistent with the Union’s climate commitment and laid down in the Integrated National Energy and Climate Plans and under the ETS Directive 2018/410 and to protect workers also through training and reskilling opportunities.

(15)  In order to enable the ERDF to provide support under ETC/Interreg in terms of both investments in infrastructure and the associated investments, training and integration activities, for the improvement and development of administrative skills and competences, it is necessary to provide that the ERDF may also provide support for activities under the specific objectives of the ESF+, set up under Regulation (EU) 2018/XXX of the European Parliament and of the Council [new ESF+]1.

(16)  SMEs and micro-enterprises are key drivers of economic growth, innovation and employment and play an important role in the economic recovery and in the transition towards a sustainable Union economy. It is necessary to promote SMEs in emerging areas tied in with European and regional challenges, such as the creative and cultural industries, as well as innovative services addressing new societal needs including integration and social inclusion of disadvantaged communities, population ageing, health and care services, eco-innovation and resource efficiency. In order to concentrate the use of limited resources in the most efficient way, but without undermining achievement of the programme's objectives, the support given to by the ERDF to productive investments under the relevant specific objective, should preferably be limited to micro, small and medium-sized enterprises ('SMEs') within the meaning of Commission Recommendation 2003/361/EC1 without prejudice for public sector companies, except where investments involve cooperation with SMEs. In order to protect the integrity of the internal market, operations benefitting undertakings shall comply with State aid rules as set out in Articles 107 and 108 of the TFEU.

(17)  The ERDF should help to redress the main regional imbalances in the Union and to reduce disparities between the levels of development of the various regions and the backwardness of the least favoured regions including those facing challenges due to the decarbonisation commitments through financial support for the transitional period. It should also foster resilience and prevent vulnerable territories from falling behind. ERDF support under the Investment for jobs and growth goal should therefore be concentrated on key Union priorities in line with policy objectives laid down in Regulation (EU) 2018/xxx [new CPR]. Therefore support from the ERDF should be concentrated specifically on the two policy objectives of a 'a smarter Europe by promoting innovative, smart and inclusive economic development and transformation, regional connectivity in the area of technologies, developing the information and communication technologies (ICT), connectivity and efficient public administration and 'a greener, low-carbon and resilient Europe for all by promoting clean and fair energy transition, green and blue investment, the circular economy, climate adaptation and risk prevention and management 'while taking account of the overall policy objectives of a more cohesive and solidarity-based Europe helping reduce economic, social and territorial asymmetries. Said thematic concentration should be attained at national level, allowing margins for flexibility at the level of individual programmes and between various categories of regions, taking account too of different levels of development. In addition, the methodology to classify the regions should be set out in detail taking into account the specific situation of the outermost regions.

(17a)  In order to ensure the strategic importance of investments co-financed by the ERDF and CF, Members States could make a duly justified request for further flexibility within the current framework of Stability and Growth Pact for the public or equivalent structural expenditure.

(18)  In order to concentrate the support on key Union priorities and in line with the objectives of social, economic and territorial cohesion set out in Article 174 TFEU and the policy objectives laid down in Regulation (EU) 2018/xxx [new CPR], it is also appropriate that thematic concentration requirements should be respected throughout the programming period, including in the case of transfer between priorities within a programme or between programmes.


(18a)  The ERDF should address the problems of accessibility to, and remoteness from, large markets, faced by areas with an extremely low population density, as referred to in Protocol No 6 on special provisions for Objective 6 in the framework of the Structural Funds in Finland and Sweden to the 1994 Act of Accession. The ERDF should also address the specific difficulties encountered by certain islands, border regions, mountain regions and sparsely populated areas, the geographical situation of which slows down their development, with a view to supporting their sustainable development.

(19)  This Regulation should set out the different types of activities the costs of which may be supported by means of investments from the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund, under their respective objectives as set out in the TFEU including crowdfunding. The Cohesion Fund should be able to support investments in the environment and in TEN-T. With regard to the ERDF, the list of activities should take into account specific national and regional development needs as well as endogenous potential and be simplified and it should be able to support investments in infrastructure, including research and innovation infrastructure and facilities, cultural and heritage infrastructure, sustainable tourism infrastructure also through the tourist districts, services to enterprises, as well as investments in housing, investments in relation to access to services with a particular focus on disadvantaged, marginalised and segregated communities, productive investments in SME's, equipment, software and intangible assets, incentives during the transition period of regions in the process of decarbonisation, as well as measures with regard to information, communication, studies, networking, cooperation, exchange of experiences between partners and activities involving clusters. In order to support the programme implementation, both funds should also be able to support technical assistance activities. Finally, in order to support provide for a broader range of interventions for Interreg programmes, the scope should be enlarged to also include the sharing a broad range of facilities and human resources and costs linked to measures within the scope of the ESF+.

(20)  Trans-European transport networks projects in accordance with Regulation (EU) No1316/2013 shall continue to be financed from the Cohesion Fund, including tackling the missing links and bottlenecks, in a balanced manner as well as including for improving the safety of existing bridges and tunnels via both shared management and the direct implementation mode under the Connecting Europe Facility ('CEF'). These networks must prioritise investment in road transport networks and boost public services in rural areas, especially in sparsely populated areas and in areas with largely ageing populations, in order to foster interconnectivity between cities and the countryside, promote rural development, bridge the digital divide.

(21)  At the same time, it is important to identify synergies on the one hand and clarify those activities which fall outside the scope of the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund on the other hand; this in order to multiplication effects or avoid duplication of available financing. In addition, it should be explicitly set out that the overseas countries and territories listed in Annex II of the TFEU are not eligible for support from the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund.

(22)

Member States should regularly transmit to the Commission information on the progress made using the common output and result indicators set out in Annex I. Common output and result indicators could be complemented, where necessary by programme-specific output and result indicators. The information provided by the Member States should be the basis on which the Commission should report on the progress towards the achievement of specific objectives over the whole programming period using for this purpose a core set of indicators set out in Annex II.

(23)  Pursuant to paragraph 22 and 23 of the Inter-institutional agreement for Better Law-Making of 13 April 2016, there is a need to evaluate the Funds on the basis of information collected through specific monitoring requirements, while avoiding overregulation and administrative burdens. These requirements, where appropriate, can include measurable indicators, as a basis for evaluating the effects of the Funds on the ground.

(24)  In order to maximise the contribution to territorial development, and to address more effectively economic, demographic, environmental and social challenges, as envisaged in Article 174 TFEU, in areas with natural or demographic disadvantages including ageing, rural desertification and demographic decline but also demographic pressure or where it is difficult to access basic services, actions in this field should be based on programmes, axes or integrated territorial strategies including urban areas and rural communities. These actions should be the two sides of the same coin, based on both the central urban hubs and their surroundings as well as the more remote rural. These strategies may also benefit from a multifund and integrated approach involving the ERDF, ESF+, EMFF and EAFRD. A minimum target of 5% of ERDF resources should be earmarked at national level for integrated territorial development. Therefore, support should be delivered ensuring appropriate involvement of local, regional and urban authorities, economic and social partners and representatives of civil society and non-governmental organisations.

(24a)  Specific attention should be paid to carbon-intensive areas facing challenges due to decarbonisation commitments, in view of assisting them in pursuing strategies consistent with the Union’s climate commitment under the Paris Agreement that protect workers and affected communities alike. Such areas should benefit from dedicated support to prepare and implement plans for decarbonisation of their economies taking into account the need for targeted vocational training and reskilling opportunities for the workforce.

(25)  Within the framework of sustainable urban development, it is considered necessary to support integrated territorial development in order to more effectively tackle the economic, environmental, climate, demographic, technology and social and cultural challenges affecting urban areas, including functional urban areas and rural communities, while taking into account the need to promote urban-rural linkages, including through peri-urban areas where appropriate. The principles for selecting the urban areas where integrated actions for sustainable urban development are to be implemented, and the indicative amounts for those actions, should be set out in the programmes under the Investment for jobs and growth goal. Said actions may also benefit from a multifund and integrated approach involving the ERDF, ESF+, EMFF and the EAFRD. A minimum target of 10 % of the ERDF resources should be earmarked at national level for the sustainable urban development priority. It should also be established that this percentage should be respected throughout the programming period in the case of transfer between priorities within a programme or between programmes, including at the mid-term review.

(26)  In order to identify or provide solutions which address issues relating to sustainable urban development at Union level, the Urban Innovative Actions in the area of sustainable urban development should be continued and developed into a European Urban Initiative. That initiative should support the Urban Agenda for the European Union1 aiming to stimulate growth, liveability and innovation and to identify and successfully tackle social challenges.


(27)  Specific attention should be paid to outermost regions, namely by adopting measures under Article 349 of the TFEU providing for an additional allocation for the outermost regions to offset the additional costs incurred in these regions as a result of one or several of the permanent restraints referred to in Article 349 of the TFEU, namely remoteness, insularity, small size, difficult topography and climate, economic dependence on a few products, the permanence and combination of which severely restrain their development. This allocation can cover investments, operating costs and public service obligations aimed at offsetting additional costs caused by such restraints. Operating aid may cover expenditure on freight transport services, green logistics, mobility management and start-up aid for transport services as well as expenditure on operations linked to storage constraints, the excessive size and maintenance of production tools, and the lack of human capital in the local market. This allocation shall not be subject to the thematic concentration provided for in this Regulation. In order to protect the integrity of the internal market, and as is the case for all operations co-financed by the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund, any ERDF support to the financing of operating and investment aid in the outermost regions should comply with State aid rules as set out in Articles 107 and 108 of the TFEU.

(28)

In order to amend certain non-essential elements of this Regulation, the power to adopt acts in accordance with Article 290 of the TFEU should be delegated to the Commission in respect of

making adjustments, where justified, to the Annex II which sets out list of

indicators used as a basis t

o provide information to the European Parliament and to the Council on performance of programmes

. It is of particular

importance that the Commission carry out appropriate consultations during its preparatory work, including at expert level, and that those consultations be conducted in accordance with the principles laid down in the Interinstitutional Agreement on Better Law-Making of 13 April 2016

. In particular, in order to ensure equal participation in the preparation of delegated acts, the European Parliament and the Council receive all documents at the same time as Member States’ experts, and their experts systematically have access to meetings of Commission expert groups dealing with the preparation of delegated acts.

(29)  Since the objective of this Regulation, namely to reinforce economic, social and territorial cohesion by redressing the main regional imbalances in the Union through citizens oriented approach aimed at supporting community led development and fostering active citizenship, cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States but can rather, by reason of the extent of the disparities between the levels of development of the various regions and the backwardness of the least favoured regions and the limit on the financial resources of the Member States and regions, be better achieved at Union level, the Union may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the TEU. In accordance with the principle of proportionality, as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve that objective,



HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:

CHAPTER I

Common provisions

Article 1

Subject matter

1.

This Regulation sets out the specific objectives and the scope of support from the European Regional Development Fund ('ERDF') with regard to the Investment for jobs and growth goal and the European territorial cooperation goal (Interreg) referred to in Article [4(2)] of Regulation (EU) 2018/xxxx [new CPR].

Article 1a

 

Tasks of the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund

 

The ERDF and the Cohesion Fund (CF) shall contribute to the overall objective of strengthening the Union’s economic, social and territorial cohesion.

 

The ERDF shall contribute to reducing disparities between the levels of development of the various regions within the Union, and to reducing the backwardness of the least favoured regions including environmental challenges, through sustainable development and structural adjustment of regional economies.

 

The Cohesion Fund shall contribute to projects in the field of trans-European networks and environment.

2.

This Regulation also sets out the specific objectives and the scope support from the Cohesion Fund with regard to the Investment for jobs and growth goal ('the Investment for jobs and growth goal') referred to in [point (a) of Article 4(2)] of Regulation (EU) 2018/xxxx [new CPR].

Article 2

Specific objectives for the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund

1.

In accordance with the policy objectives set out in Article [4(1)] of Regulation (EU) 2018/xxxx[new CPR], the ERDF shall support the following specific objectives:

(a)  'a smarter Europe by promoting innovative, smart and inclusive economic development and transformation, regional connectivity in the area of technologies, developing the information and communication technologies (ICT), connectivity and efficient public administration' ('PO 1') by:

(i)  supporting the development and enhancement of research and innovation capacities, investments and infrastructure, the uptake of advanced technologies and supporting and promoting the clusters for innovation between business, research, academia and public authorities;

(ii)  enhancing digital connectivity and reaping the benefits of digitisation for citizens, scientific establishments, companies, governments and public administration at regional and local level including smart cities and smart villages;


(iii)  enhancing sustainable growth and competitiveness of SMEs and providing support for the creation and safeguarding of jobs and support technological upgrade and modernization;


(iv)  developing skills and strategies, and building capacities for smart specialisation, just transition, circular economy, social innovation, entrepreneurship, tourism sector and transition to industry 4.0;

(b)  'a greener, low-carbon and resilient Europe for all by promoting clean and fair energy transition, green and blue investment, the circular economy, climate adaptation and risk prevention and management ('PO 2') by:

(i)  promoting energy efficiency, savings and energy poverty measures;

(ii)  promoting sustainable renewable energy;

(iii)  developing smart energy systems, grids and storage;

(iv)  promoting climate change adaptation, risk prevention, management of and resilience to extreme weather events and natural disasters including earthquakes, forest fires, flooding and drought, taking into account eco-system based approaches;

	
(v)  promoting universal access to water and sustainable water management;

	
(vi)  promoting the transition to a circular economy economy and improving resource efficiency;

(vi a)  supporting regional transformation processes towards decarbonisation as well as the transition towards low-carbon energy generation

(vii)  protecting and enhancing biodiversity and natural heritage, preserving and highlighting protected natural areas, natural resources and reducing every form of pollution such as air, water, soil, noise and light pollution;


(viia)  enhancing green infrastructure in functional urban areas, developing small-scale multimodal urban mobility as part of a net zero emission economy;

(c)  'a more connected Europe for all by enhancing mobility' ('PO 3') by:

(ii)  developing a climate resilient, intelligent, secure and sustainable road and railway and intermodal TEN-T and cross-border links focussing on noise reduction measures, environmentally friendly public transport and rail networks;

(iii)  developing sustainable, climate resilient, intelligent and intermodal national, regional and local mobility, including improved access to TEN-T, cross-border mobility and environmentally friendly public transport networks;

(d)  'a more social and inclusive Europe implementing the European Pillar of Social Rights’ (‘PO 4’) by:

(i)  enhancing the effectiveness and inclusiveness of labour markets and access to high quality employment through developing social innovation and infrastructure and promoting the social economy and innovation;

(ii)  improving equal access to inclusive and quality services in education, training and life long learning and sport through developing accessible infrastructure and services;

	
(iia)  investment in housing, when owned by public authorities or non-profit operators for use as housing designated for low-income households or people with special needs;

(iii)  promoting the socioeconomic inclusion of marginalised communities and deprived communities such as Roma and disadvantage groups, through integrated actions including housing and social services;

(iiia)  promoting long-term socio-economic integration of refugees and migrants under international protection through integrated actions including housing and social services by providing infrastructure support to cities and local authorities involved;

(iv)  ensuring equal access to health care through developing health care infrastructure and other assets, including primary care and preventive measures and advancing the transition from institutional to family- and community-based care;

	
(iva)  providing support for physical, economic and social regeneration in deprived communities;


(e)  'a Europe closer to citizens by fostering the sustainable and integrated development of urban and all other areas and local initiatives' ('PO 5') by

(i)  fostering integrated and inclusive social, economic and environmental development, culture, natural heritage, sustainable tourism also through the tourist districts, sports and security in urban areas, including functional urban areas;

(ii)  fostering integrated and inclusive social, economic and environmental development, culture, natural heritage, sustainable tourism also through the tourist districts, sports and security, all at local level, rural, mountain, islands and coastal regions, isolated and sparsely populated and all other areas that have difficulty accessing basic services including also on NUTS 3 level, through territorial and local development strategies, through the forms set out in points (a) (b) and (c) of Article 22 of Regulation (EU) 2018/xxxx [new CPR].

2.

The Cohesion Fund shall support PO 2 and specific obejctives under PO 3 set out in points (ii), (iii) and (iv) of paragraph 1(c).

1a.  Enhancing small-scale multimodal urban mobility as referred to in point b (vii a) of this Article, which shall be considered eligible for support if ERDF contribution to the operation shall not exceed EUR 10 000 000.

3.

With regard to achieving the specific objectives set out in paragraph 1, the ERDF or the Cohesion Fund may also:

(a)  improve the capacity of programme authorities, and bodies linked to the implementation of the Funds, and support public authorities, local and regional administrations responsible for implementation of the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund, through specific administrative capacity-building plans aimed at localising the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), simplifying procedures and cutting implementation time for actions, provided these are structural in nature and the programme itself has measurable objectives;

Support of capacity-building, referred to point (a) of this Article, may be complemented by additional support from the Reform Support Programme established under regulation EU (2018/xxx (Reform Support Programme);

(b)

enhance cooperation with partners both within and outside a given Member State.

Cooperation referred to in point (b) shall include cooperation with partners from cross-border regions, from non-contiguous regions or from regions located in the territory covered by a European Grouping of Territorial Cooperation, a macro-regional or sea-basin strategy or a combination thereof.

Meaningful participation of regional and local authorities, civil society organisations including beneficiaries in all stages of the preparation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the Programmes under ERDF shall be ensured in line with principles, set in the European Code of Conduct on Partnership

Article 3

Thematic concentration of ERDF support

1.

With regard to programmes implemented under the Investment for jobs and growth goal, the total ERDF resources in each Member State shall be concentrated at national level in accordance with paragraphs 3 and 4.

2.

With regard to the thematic concentration of support for Member States comprising outermost regions, the ERDF resources allocated specifically to programmes for the outermost regions and those allocated to all other regions shall be treated separately.

3.

Regions at NUTS 2 level shall be classified, in terms of their gross domestic product (GDP) per capita, as follows:

(a)  those with a GDP per capita above 100 % of the average GDP of the EU27 ('group 1');

(b)  those with a GDP per capita between 75 % and 100 % of the average GDP of the EU27 ('group 2');

(c)  those with a GDP per capita less than 75 % of the average GDP of the EU27 average ('group 3').

For the purposes of this Article, the classification of a region under one of the three categories of regions shall be determined on the basis of the ratio between the gross domestic product per capita of each region, measured in purchasing power standards (PPS) and calculated on the basis of Union figures for the period from 2014 to 2016, and the average GDP of the EU27 for that same reference period.


With regard to programmes under the Investment for Jobs and growth goal for the outermost regions, they shall be classified as falling within group 3.

4.

Member States shall comply with the following thematic concentration requirements:

(a)  For the more developed regions category (group 1) they shall allocate

i)  at least 50 % of total ERDF resources at national level to PO 1; and

	
ii)  at least 30 % of total ERDF resources at national level to PO 2.

(b)  For the transition regions category (group 2) they shall allocate:

	
i)  at least 40 % of total ERDF resources at national level to PO 1 and
	
ii)  at least 30 % of total ERDF resources at national level to PO 2.


(c)  For the less developed regions category (group 3) they shall allocate:

	
i)  at least 30 % of total ERDF resources at national level to PO 1 and

	
ii)  at least 30 % of total ERDF resources at national level to PO 2.

4a.  In duly duly justified cases, the Member State concerned may request that the concentration level for resources at regional category level be decreased by no more than 5 percentage points, or 10 percentage points in the cases of outermost regions, for the thematic objective determined in accordance with Article 3(4)(a)(i), Article 3(4)(b)(i) and Article 3(4)(c)(i) [new ERDF-Cohesion Fund].

5.

The thematic concentration requirements set out in paragraph 4 shall be complied with throughout the entire programming period, including when ERDF allocations are transferred between priorities of a programme or between programmes and at the mid-term review in accordance with Article [14] of Regulation (EU) 2018/xxxx [new CPR].

6.  Where the ERDF allocation concerning PO 1 or PO 2, the main policy objectives, or both of a given programme is reduced following a decommitment under Article [99] of Regulation (EU) 2018/xxxx [new CPR], or due to financial corrections by the Commission in accordance with Article [98] of that Regulation, compliance with the thematic concentration requirement set out in paragraph 4 shall not be re-assessed.

6a.  Resources allocated to PO5 that contribute to PO1 and PO2, shall be calculated as contributing to thematic concentration requirements. The contribution to PO1 and PO2 shall be duly justified based on a substantiated assessment.

(aa)  investments in research, development and innovation (R&D&I);

Article 4

Scope of support from the ERDF

1.

The ERDF shall support the following:

(a)

investments in infrastructure;

(b)

investments in access to services;

(c)  productive investments and investments which help to safeguard existing jobs and create new jobs in SMEs and any support in SMEs in the form of grants and financial instruments;

(d)

equipment, software and intangible assets;

(e)

information, communication, studies, networking, cooperation, exchange of experience and activities involving clusters;

(f)

technical assistance.

Productive investments in enterprises other than SMEs can be supported when they involve cooperation with SMEs or business infrastructure that benefits SMEs.



In order to contribute to the specific objective under PO 1 set out in point (a) (iv) of Article 2(1), the ERDF shall also support training, mentoring, life long learning, reskilling and education activities.

	
In addition, productive investments in SMEs can also be supported in research and innovation activities supported under point (a)(i) of Article 2 (1).

2.

Under the European territorial cooperation goal (Interreg), the ERDF may also support:

(a)

sharing of facilities and of human resources;

(b)

accompanying soft investments and other activities linked to PO 4 under the European Social Fund Plus as set out in Regulation (EU) 2018/xxxx [new ESF+].

Article 5

Scope of support from the Cohesion Fund

1.

The Cohesion Fund shall support the following:

(a)  investments in the environment, including investments related to circular economy, sustainable development and renewable energy presenting environmental benefits;

(b)  investments in TEN-T core and comprehensive network;

(c)  technical assistance, including improvement and development of administrative skills and competences of local authorities in managing these funds.

(ca)  information, communication, studies, networking, cooperation, exchange of experience and activities involving clusters;

Member States shall ensure an appropriate balance between investments under points (a) and (b), based on the investments and specific requirements of each Member State.

2.  The amount of the Cohesion Fund transferred to the Connecting Europe Facility23 shall be proportional and shall be used for TEN-T projects.

Article 6

Exclusion from the scope of the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund

1.

The ERDF and the Cohesion Fund shall not support:

(a)

the decommissioning or the construction of nuclear power stations;

(b)

investment to achieve the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions from activities listed in Annex I to Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council

;;

(c)

the manufacturing, processing and marketing of tobacco and tobacco products;

(d)

undertakings in difficulty, as defined in point 18 of Article 2 of Commission Regulation (EU) No 651/2014

;
(e)  investment in new regional airport and in airport infrastructure, except for:

(ea)  investment related to outermost regions;

(eb)  support linked to core TEN-T networks;

(ec)  Investment related to emvironmental protection and aimed to mitigate or reduce its negative environmental impact.

(f)  investment in disposal of waste in landfill, except in the outermost regions and for support for decommissioning, reconverting or making safe existing facilities and without prejudice to Article 4(2) of Directive (EU) 2008/98 of the European Parliament and of the Council1;

(g)  investment in facilities for the treatment of residual waste with the exception of outermost regions and in case of state-of-the-art recycling solutions in line with the principles of the circular economy and the waste hierarchy fully respecting the targets laid down in Art 11(2) of Directive (EU) 2008/98 and provided that Member States have established their waste management plans according to Art. 29 of Directive (EU) 2018/851. Residual waste should be understood as primarily non separately collected municipal waste and rejects from waste treatment;

(h)  investment related to production, processing, transport, distribution, storage or combustion of fossil fuels, with the exception of investment:

 

(ha)  related to clean vehicles as defined in Article 4 of Directive 2009/33/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council26

 

(hb)  related to low carbon high efficiency co-generation and efficient district heating systems;

 

(hc)  providing substantial contribution to a net-zero emission economy;

 

(hd)  related to achieving the targets laid out in the Directive (EU) 2018/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 amending Directive 2012/27/EU on energy efficiency and the Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources;

1a.  The exceptions mentioned in point b of this paragraph h shall be limited to an amount up to 1 % of the total ERDF-CF resources at national level.
	
(ja)  investments in the construction of institutional care facilities that segregate or infringe on personal choice and independence;

2.

In addition, the Cohesion Fund shall not support investment in housing unless related to the promotion of energy efficiency or renewable energy use.

3.

Overseas countries and territories shall not be eligible for support from the ERDF or the Cohesion Fund, but may participate in Interreg programmes in accordance with the conditions set out in Regulation (EU) 2018/xxxx [ETC (Interreg].

Article 7

Indicators

1.

Common output and result indicators, as set out in the Annex I with regard to the ERDF and to the Cohesion Fund, and, where necessary, programme-specific output and result indicators shall be used in accordance with point (a) of the second subparagraph of Article [12(1)], point (d)(ii) of Article [17(3)] and point (b) of Article [37(2)] of Regulation (EU) 2018/xxxx [new CPR].

2.

For output indicators, baselines shall be set at zero. The milestones set for 2024 and targets set for 2029 shall be cumulative.

3.

In compliance with its reporting requirement pursuant to Article [38(3)(e)(i)] of the Financial Regulation, the Commission shall present to the European Parliament and the Council information on performance in accordance with Annex II.

4.

The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 13 to amend Annex I in order to make the necessary adjustments to the list of indicators to be used by Member States and to amend Annex II in order to make the necessary adjustments to the information on performance to be provided to the European Parliament and the Council.

CHAPTER II

Specific provisions on the treatment of particular territorial features

Article 8

Integrated territorial development

1.

The ERDF may support integrated territorial development within programmes under both goals referred to in Article 4(2) of Regulation (EU) 2018/xxxx [new CPR] in accordance with Chapter II of Title III of that Regulation

[new CPR]

.

2.

Member States shall implement integrated territorial development, supported by the ERDF, exclusively through the forms referred to in Article [22] of Regulation (EU) 2018/xxxx [new CPR].

Article 9

Sustainable urban development

1.

The ERDF shall support integrated territorial development based on territorial strategies in accordance with Article [23] of Regulation (EU) 2018/xxxx [new CPR]

focused on urban areas ('sustainable urban development') within programmes under both goals referred to in Article 4(2) of that Regulation.

2.

At least 6% of the ERDF resources at national level under the Investment for jobs and growth goal,

other than for technical assistance,

shall be allocated to sustainable urban development in the form of community-led local development, integrated territorial investments or another territorial tool under PO5.

The programme or programmes concerned shall set out the planned amounts for this purpose under point (d)(vii) of Article [17(3)] of Regulation (EU) 2018/xxxx [new CPR].

3.

The percentage allocated to sustainable urban development under paragraph 2 shall be complied with throughout the entire programming period when ERDF allocations are transferred between priorities of a programme or between programmes, including at the mid-term review in accordance with Article [14] of Regulation (EU) 2018/xxxx [new CPR].

4.

Where the ERDF allocation is reduced following a decommitment under Article [99] of Regulation (EU) No [new CPR], or due to financial corrections by the Commission in accordance with Article [98] of that Regulation, compliance with paragraph 2 shall not be re-assessed.

Article 10

European Urban Initiative

1.

The ERDF shall also support the European Urban Initiative, implemented by the Commission in direct and indirect management.

This initiative shall cover all urban areas and shall support the Urban Agenda of the Union.

2.

The European Urban Initiative shall consist of the following three strands, all with regard to sustainable urban development:

(a)

support of capacity-building;

(b)

support of innovative actions;

(c)

support of knowledge, policy development and communication.

Upon request from one or more Member States, the European Urban Initiative may also support inter-governmental cooperation on urban matters.

Article 11

Outermost regions

1.

The specific additional allocation

for the outermost regions

shall be used to offset the additional costs

incurred in these regions as a result of

one or several of the permanent restraints to their development listed in Article 349 of the TFEU.

2.

The allocation referred to in paragraph 1 shall support:

(a)

the activities within the scope as set out in Article 4

;

(b)

by way of derogation from Article 4, measures covering operating costs with

a view to offsetting the additional costs incurred in the outermost regions as a

result of one or several of the permanent restraints to their development listed in Article 349 of the TFEU.

The allocation referred to in paragraph 1 may also support expenditure covering compensation granted for the provision of public service obligation and contracts in the outermost regions.

3.

The allocation, referred to in paragraph 1, shall not support:

(a)

operations involving products listed in Annex I to the TFEU;

(b)

aid for the transport of persons authorised under point (a) of Article 107(2) of the TFEU;

(c)

tax exemptions and exemption of social charges

(d)

p

ublic services obligations not discharged by undertakings and where the State acts by exercising public power.

CHAPTER III

Final provisions

Article 12

Transitional provisions

Regulations (EC) No 1300/2013 and 1301/2013 or any act adopted thereunder shall continue to apply to programmes and operations supported by the ERDF or the Cohesion Fund under the 2014-2020 programming period.

Article 13

Exercise of the delegation

1.

The power to adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission subject to the conditions laid down in this Article.

2.

The power to adopt delegated acts referred to in Article 7(4) shall be conferred on the Commission for an indeterminate period of time from the date of the entry into force of this Regulation.

3.

The delegation of power referred to in Article 7(4) may be revoked at any time by the European Parliament or by the Council. A decision to revoke shall put an end to the delegation of the power specified in that decision. It shall take effect the day following the publication of the decision in the

Official Journal of the European Union

or at a later date specified therein. It shall not affect the validity of any delegated acts already in force.

4.

Before adopting a delegated act, the Commission shall consult experts designated by each Member State in accordance with the principles laid down in the Interinstitutional Agreement on Better Law-Making of 13 April 2016

.

5.

As soon as it adopts a delegated act, the Commission shall notify it simultaneously to the European Parliament and to the Council.

6.

A delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 7(4) shall enter into force only if no objection has been expressed either by the European Parliament or by the Council within a period of two months of notification of that act to the European Parliament and the Council or if, before the expiry of that period, the European Parliament and the Council have both informed the Commission that they will not object. That period shall be extended by two months at the initiative of the European Parliament or of the Council.

Article 14

Entry into force

This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the

Official Journal of the European Union

.

This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States.

Done at Strasbourg,

For the European Parliament

For the Council

The President

The President

EUROPEAN COMMISSION

Strasbourg, 29.5.2018

COM(2018) 372 final

ANNEX

to the

Proposal for a

REGULATION OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL

on the European Regional Development Fund and on the Cohesion Fund

{SEC(2018) 268 final}

{SWD(2018) 282 final}

{SWD(2018) 283 final}

ANNEX I

Common output and result indicators for the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund - Article 7(1)

Table 1: Common output and result indicators for ERDF (Investment for jobs and growth and Interreg) and the Cohesion Fund**

Policy objective

Outputs

Results

(1)

(2)

(3)

1. A smarter Europe by promoting innovative and smart economic transformation

RCO

01 - Enterprises supported (of which: micro, small, medium, large)

*

RCO 02 - Enterprises supported by grants

*

RCO 03 - Enterprises supported by financial instruments

*

RCO 04 - Enterprises with non-financial support

*

RCO 05 - Start-ups supported

*

RCO 06 - Researchers working in supported research facilities

RCO 07 - Research institutions participating in joint research projects

RCO 08 - Nominal value of research and innovation equipment

RCO 10 - Enterprises cooperating with research institutions

RCO 96 – Interregional investments in EU projects

*

RCR

01 - Jobs created in supported entities

*

RCR 02 - Private investments matching public support (of which: grants, financial instruments)

*

RCR 03 – SMEs introducing product or process innovation

*

RCR 04 - SMEs introducing marketing or organisational innovation

*

RCR 05 - SMEs innovating in-house

*

RCR 06 - Patent applications submitted to European Patent Office

*

RCR 07 - Trademark and design applications

*

RCR 08 - Public-private co-publications

RCO 12 - Enterprises supported to digitise their products and services

RCO 13 - Digital services and products developed for enterprises

RCO 14 - Public institutions supported to develop digital services and applications

RCR 11 - Users of new public digital services and applications

*

RCR 12 - Users of new digital products, services and applications developed by enterprises

*

RCR 13 - Enterprises reaching high digital intensity

*

RCR 14 - Enterprises using public digital services

*

RCO 15 - Capacity of incubation created

*

RCR 16 - High growth enterprises supported

*

RCR 17 - 3-year-old enterprises surviving in the market

*

RCR 18 - SMEs using incubator services one year after the incubator creation

RCR 19 - Enterprises with higher turnover

RCR 25 - Value added per employee in supported SMEs

*

RCO 16 - Stakeholders participating in entrepreneurial discovery process

RCO 17 - Investments in regional/ local ecosystems for skills development

RCO 101 – SMEs investing in skills development

RCO 102 - SMEs investing in training management systems

*

RCR 24 - SMEs benefiting

from activities for skills development delivered by a local/ regional ecosystem

RCR 97 – Apprenticeships supported in SMEs

RCR 98 – SMEs staff completing Continuing Vocational Education and Training (CVET) (by type of skill: technical, management, entrepreneurship, green, other)

RCR 99 – SMEs staff completing alternative training for knowledge intensive service activities (KISA) (by type of  skills: technical, management, entrepreneurship, green, other)

RCR 100 – SMEs staff completing formal training for skills development (KISA) (by type of skills: technical, management, entrepreneurship, green, other)

*

2. A greener, low-carbon Europe by promoting clean and fair energy transition, green and blue investment, the circular economy, climate adaptation and risk prevention and management

RCO 18 - Households supported to improve energy performance of their dwelling

RCO 19 - Public buildings supported to improve energy performance

RCO 20 - District heating network lines newly constructed or improved

RCR 26 - Annual final energy consumption (of which: residential, private non-residential, public non-residential)

RCR 27 - Households with improved energy performance of their dwellings

RCR 28 - Buildings with improved energy classification  (of which: residential, private non-residential, public non-residential)

RCR 29 - Estimated greenhouse gas emissions

*

RCR 30 - Enterprises with improved energy performance

RCO 22 - Additional production capacity for renewable energy  (of which: electricity, thermal)

RCO 97 – Number of energy communities and renewable energy communities supported

*

RCR 31 - Total renewable energy produced (of which: electricity, thermal)

RCR 32 – Renewable energy: Capacity connected to the grid (operational)

*

RCO 23 - Digital management systems for smart grids

RCO 98 – Households supported to use smart energy grids

RCR 33 - Users connected to smart grids

RCR 34 - Roll-out of projects for smart grids

RCO 24 - New or upgraded disaster monitoring, preparedness, warning and response systems

*

RCO 25 - Coastal strip, river banks and lakeshores, and landslide protection newly built or consolidated to protect people, assets and the natural environment

RCO 26 - Green infrastructure built for adaptation to climate change

RCO 27 - National/ regional/ local strategies addressing climate change adaptation

RCO 28 - Areas covered by protection measures against forest fires

RCR 35 - Population benefiting from flood protection measures

RCR 36 - Population benefiting from forest fires protection measures

RCR 37 - Population benefiting from protection measures against climate related natural disasters (other than floods and forest fires)

RCR 96 – Population benefiting from protection measures against non-climate related natural risks and risks related to human activities

*

RCR 38 - Estimated average response time to disaster situations

*

RCO 30 - Length of new or consolidated pipes for  household water connections

RCO 31 - Length of sewage collection networks newly constructed or consolidated

RCO 32 - New or upgraded capacity for waste water treatment

RCR 41 - Population connected to improved water supply

RCR 42 - Population connected to at least secondary waste water treatment

RCR 43 - Water losses

RCR 44 - Waste water properly treated

RCO 34 - Additional capacity for waste recycling

RCR 46 - Population served by waste recycling facilities and small waste management systems

RCR 47 - Waste recycled

RCR 48 - Recycled waste used as raw materials

RCR 49 - Waste recovered

RCO 36 - Surface area of green infrastructure supported in urban areas

RCO 37 - Surface of Natura 2000 sites covered by protection and restoration measures in accordance with the prioritised action framework

RCO 99 - Surface area outside Natura 2000 sites covered by protection and restoration measures

RCO 38 - Surface area of rehabilitated land supported

RCO 39 - Systems for monitoring air pollution installed

RCR 50 - Population benefiting from measures for air quality

RCR 95 -Population having access to new or upgraded green infrastructure in urban areas

RCR 51 - Population benefiting from measures for noise reduction

RCR 52 - Rehabilitated land used for green areas, social housing, economic or community activities

3. A more connected Europe by enhancing mobility and regional ICT connectivity

RCO 41 - Additional households with broadband access of very high capacity

RCO 42 - Additional enterprises with broadband access of very high capacity

RCR 53 - Households with broadband subscriptions to a very high capacity network

RCR 54 - Enterprises with broadband subscriptions to a very high capacity network

RCO 43 - Length of new roads supported - TEN-T

RCO 44 - Length of new roads supported - other

RCO 45 - Length of roads reconstructed or upgraded - TEN-T

RCO 46 - Length of roads reconstructed or upgraded - other

RCR 55 - Users of newly built, reconstructed or upgraded roads

RCR 56 - Time savings due to improved road infrastructure

RCR 101 – Time savings due to improved rail infrastructure

RCO 47 - Length of new rail supported - TEN-T

RCO 48 - Length of new rail supported - other

RCO 49 - Length of rail reconstructed or upgraded - TEN-T

RCO 50 - Length of rail reconstructed or upgraded - other

RCO 51 - Length of new or upgraded inland waterways - TEN-T

RCO 52 - Length of new or upgraded inland waterways - other

RCO 53 - Railways stations and facilities - new or upgraded

RCO 54 - Intermodal connections - new or upgraded

RCO 100 – Number of ports supported

RCR 57 - Length of European Rail Traffic Management System equipped railways in operation

RCR 58 - Annual number of passengers on supported railways

RCR 59 - Freight transport on rail

RCR 60 - Freight transport on inland waterways

RCO 55 - Length of tram and metro lines- new

RCO 56 - Length of tram and metro lines- reconstructed/ upgraded

RCO 57 - Environmentally friendly rolling stock for public transport

RCO 58 - Dedicated cycling infrastructure supported

RCO 59 - Alternative fuels infrastructure (refuelling/ recharging points) supported

RCO 60 - Cities and towns with new or upgraded digitised urban transport systems

RCR 62 - Annual passengers of public transport

RCR 63 - Annual users of new/ upgraded tram and metro lines

RCR 64 - Annual users of dedicated cycling infrastructure

4. A more social Europe implementing the European Pillar of Social Rights

RCO 61 - Annual unemployed persons served by enhanced facilities for employment services (capacity)

RCR 65 - Job seekers using annually the services of the employment services supported

RCO 63 - Capacity of temporary reception infrastructure created

RCO 64 - Capacity of rehabilitated housing – migrants, refugees and persons under or applying for international protection

RCO 65 - Capacity of rehabilitated housing - other

RCR 66 - Occupancy of temporary reception infrastructure built or renovated

RCR 67 - Occupancy of rehabilitated housing – migrants, refugees and persons under or applying for international protection

RCR 68 - Occupancy of rehabilitated housing - other

RCO 66 - Classroom capacity of supported childcare infrastructure (new or upgraded)

RCO 67 - Classroom capacity of supported education infrastructure (new or upgraded)

RCR 70 - Annual number of children using childcare infrastructure supported

RCR 71 - Annual number of students using education infrastructure supported

RCO 69 - Capacity of supported health care infrastructure

RCO 70 - Capacity of supported social infrastructure (other than housing)

RCR 72 - People with access to improved health care services

RCR 73 - Annual number of persons using the health care facilities supported

RCR 74 - Annual number of persons using the social care facilities supported

RCR 75 - Average response time for medical emergencies in the area supported

5. A Europe closer to citizens by fostering the sustainable and integrated development of urban, rural and coastal areas and local initiatives

RCO 74 - Population covered by strategies for integrated urban development

RCO 75 - Integrated strategies for urban development

RCO 76 - Collaborative projects

RCO 77 - Capacity of cultural and tourism infrastructure supported

RCR 76 - Stakeholders involved in the preparation and implementation of strategies of urban development

RCR 77 - Tourists/ visits to supported sites

*

RCR 78 - Users benefiting from cultural infrastructure supported

RCO 80 – Community-led local development strategies for local development

Horizontal - Implementation

RCO 95 - Staff financed by ERDF and Cohesion Fund

RCR 91 - Average time for launch of calls, selection of projects and signature of contracts

*

RCR 92 - Average time for tendering (from launch of procurement until signature of contract)

*

RCR 93 - Average time for project implementation (from signature of contract to last payment)

*

RCR 94 - Single bidding for ERDF and Cohesion Fund interventions

*

** For presentational reasons, indicators are grouped under, but not limited to, a policy objective. In particular, under policy objective 5, specific objectives from policy objectives 1-4 may be used with the relevant indicators. In addition, in order to develop a full picture of the expected and actual performance of the programmes, the indicators marked with (*) may be used by specific objectives under more than one of the policy objectives 1 to 4, when relevant.

Table 2: Additional common output and result indicators for the ERDF for Interreg

Interreg-specific indicators

RCO 81 - Participants in cross-border mobility initiatives

RCO 82 - Participants in joint actions promoting gender equality, equal opportunities and social inclusion

RCO 83 - Joint strategies/ action plans developed or implemented

RCO 84 - Joint pilot activities implemented in projects

RCO 85 - Participants in joint training schemes

RCO 96 – Legal or administrative obstacles identified

RCO 86 - Joint administrative or legal agreements signed

RCO 87 - Organisations cooperating across borders

RCO 88 - Projects across national borders for peer-learning to enhance cooperation activities

RCO 89 - Projects across borders to improve multilevel governance

RCO 90 - Projects across national borders leading to networks/clusters

RCR 79 - Joint strategies/ action plans taken up by organisations at/ after project completion

RCR 80 - Joint pilot activities taken up or up-scaled by organisations at/ after project completion

RCR 81 - Participants completing joint training schemes

RCR 82 - Legal or administrative obstacles addressed or alleviated

RCR 83 - Persons covered by signed joint agreements signed

RCR 84 - Organisations cooperating across borders 6-12 months after project completion

RCR 85 - Participants in joint actions 6-12 months after project completion

RCR 86 - Stakeholders/ institutions with enhanced cooperation capacity beyond national borders

EUROPEAN COMMISSION

Strasbourg, 29.5.2018

COM(2018) 372 final

ANNEX

to the

Proposal for a

REGULATION OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL

on the European Regional Development Fund and on the Cohesion Fund

{SEC(2018) 268 final}

{SWD(2018) 282 final}

{SWD(2018) 283 final}

ANNEX II

Core set of performance indicators for the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund referred to in Article 7(3)

Policy objective

Specific objective

Outputs

Results

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

1. A smarter Europe by promoting innovative and smart economic transformation

(i) Enhancing research and innovation capacities

and the uptake of advanced technologies

CCO 01 - Enterprises supported to innovate

CCO 02 - Researchers working in supported research facilities

CCR 01 – (SMEs introducing product, process, marketing or organisational  innovation

(ii) Reaping the benefits of digitisation for citizens, companies and governments

CCO 03 - Enterprises and public institutions supported to develop digital products, services and applications

CCR 02 - Additional users of new digital products, services and applications developed by enterprises and public institutions

(iii) Enhancing growth and competitiveness of SMEs

CCO 04 - SMEs supported to create jobs and growth

CCR 03 - Jobs created in SMEs supported

(iv) Developing skills for smart specialisation, industrial transition and entrepreneurship

CCO 05 - SMEs investing in skills development

CCR 04 - SMEs staff benefiting from training for skills development

2. A greener, low-carbon Europe by promoting clean and fair energy transition, green and blue investment, the circular economy, climate adaptation and risk prevention and management

(i) Promoting energy efficiency measures

CCO 06 – Investments in measures to improve energy efficiency

CCR 05 – Beneficiaries with improved energy classification

(ii) Promoting renewable energy

CCO 07 - Additional renewable energy production capacity

CCR 06 – Volume of additional renewable energy produced

(iii) Developing smart energy systems, grids and storage at local level

CCO 08 - Digital management systems developed for smart grids

CCR 07 - Additional users connected to smart grids

(iv) Promoting climate change adaptation, risk prevention and disaster resilience

CCO 09 - New or upgraded disaster monitoring, warning and response systems

CCR 08 - Additional population benefiting from protection measures against floods, forest fires, and other climate related natural disasters

(v) Promoting sustainable water management

CCO 10 - New or upgraded capacity for waste water treatment

CCR 09 - Additional population connected to at least secondary waste water treatment

(vi) Promoting the transition to a circular economy

CCO 11 – New or upgraded capacity for waste recycling

CCR 10 - Additional waste recycled

(vii) Enhancing biodiversity, green infrastructure in the urban environment, and reducing pollution

CCO 12 - Surface area of green infrastructure in urban areas

CCR 11 - Population benefiting from measures for air quality

3. A more connected Europe by enhancing mobility and regional ICT connectivity

(i) Enhancing digital connectivity

CCO 13 - Additional households and enterprises with coverage by very high capacity broadband networks

CCR 12 - Additional households and enterprises with broadband subscriptions to a very high capacity networks

(ii) Developing a sustainable, climate resilient, intelligent, secure and intermodal TEN-T

CCO 14 – Road TEN-T: New and upgraded roads

CCR 13 - Time savings due to improved road infrastructure

(iii) Developing sustainable, climate resilient, intelligent and intermodal national, regional and local mobility, including improved access to TEN-T and cross-border mobility

CCO 15 – Rail TEN-T: New and upgraded railways

CCR 14 - Annual number of passengers served by improved rail transport

(iv) Promoting sustainable multimodal urban mobility

CCO 16 - Extension and modernisation of tram and metro lines

CCR 15 - Annual users served by new and modernised tram and metro lines

4. A more social Europe implementing the European Pillar of Social Rights

(i) Enhancing the effectiveness of labour markets and access to quality employment through developing social innovation and infrastructure

CCO 17 - Annual unemployed persons served by enhanced facilities for employment services

CCR 16 - Job seekers using annually enhanced facilities for employment services

(ii) Improving access to inclusive and quality services in education, training and lifelong learning through developing infrastructure

CCO 18 - New or upgraded capacity for childcare and education infrastructure

CCR 17 - Annual users served by new or upgraded childcare and education infrastructure

(iii) Increasing the socio-economic integration of marginalised communities, migrants and disadvantaged groups, through integrated measures including housing and social services;

CCO 19 - Additional capacity of reception infrastructures created or upgraded

CCR 18 - Annual users served by new and improved reception and housing facilities

(iv) Ensuring equal access to health care through developing infrastructure, including primary

care

CCO 20 - New or upgraded capacity for health care infrastructure

CCR 19 - Population with access to improved health care services

5. A Europe closer to citizens by fostering the sustainable and integrated development of urban, rural and coastal areas and local initiatives

(i) Fostering the integrated social, economic and environmental development, cultural heritage and security in urban areas

CCO 21 - Population covered by strategies for integrated urban development